Members of the Bundestag Act  
(Abgeordnetengesetz)  
Act on the Legal Status of Members of the German Bundestag as promulgated on  21 
February 1996 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 326) and last amended by Article 1 of the Act of 8 
October 2021  Improving the Transparency Rules for Members of the German Bundestag 
and Raising the Sentencing Limits Laid Down in Section 108e of the German Cri minal Code 
(Federal Law Gazette I, p. 4650)  
PART ONE  
Acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag  
Section 1  
Acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag  
The acquisition and loss of membership of the Bundestag are governed by the provisions of  
the Federal Electoral Act.  
PART TWO  
Membership of the Bundestag and professional activity  
Section 2  
Protection of the free exercise of an electoral mandate  
(1) No one may be prevented from standing as a candidate for a mandate to serve as a 
Member of the Bundestag or from acquiring, accepting or holding such a mandate.  
(2) Discrimination at work on the grounds of candidature for or acquisition, acceptance and 
exercise of a mandate shall be inadmissible.  
(3) Termination of an employment contract or dismissa l on grounds of the acquisition, 
acceptance or exercise of a mandate shall be inadmissible. In all other respects, termination 
of an employment contract shall only be permitted for a compelling reason. Protection 
against termination or dismissal shall take  effect on the selection of the candidate by the 
relevant party organ or on submission of the list of nominated candidates. It shall continue to 
apply for one year after the end of the Member’s term of office.  
Section 3  
Election leave  
During the two months  immediately prior to polling day, a candidate for a seat in the 
Bundestag shall be granted leave of up to two months on request for the purpose of
preparing for the election. There shall be no entitlement to continued payment of 
emolume nts during the peri od of leave.  
Section 4  
Seniority and length of service  
(1) After the end of the Member’s term of office, his or her period of membership of the 
Bundestag shall be credited to his or her professional seniority and company service.  
(2) Within the context of  an existing pension scheme operated by a company or companies, 
the period referred to in subsection (1) above shall only be reckonable for the purpose of 
fulfilling the vesting periods prescribed in section 1 of the Improvement of Company Pension 
Schemes Act (Gesetz zur Verbesserung der b etrieblichen Altersversorgung ). 
PART THREE  
Legal status of public servants  elected to the Bundestag  
Section 5  
Suspension of the rights and duties  arising from employment in the public service  
(1) With the exception of the duty of confidentiality and the obligation to refrain from 
accepting rewards and gifts, the rights and duties arising from salaried membership of the 
permanent civil service shall be suspended from the date on which the election result was 
established by t he Federal Electoral Committee (first sentence of section 42(2) of the 
Federal Electoral Act ( Bundeswahlgesetz )), or on which a permanent civil servant accepted 
his or her mandate, for the period of his or her term of office. The same shall apply where a 
Member of the Bundestag is appointed to such a position in the public service from the date 
on which the appointment takes effect. The civil servant shall be entitled to use his or her 
official title or grade with the addition of the word "retired" (" außer Dienst ", "a.D."). The 
foregoing provisions shall be without prejudice to the right to treatment and compensation of 
civil servants who have been injured in an accident. The first sentence above shall apply for 
a period not extending beyond the civil servan t’s voluntary or compulsory retirement.  
(2) In the case of civil servants with non -active status, subsection (1) above shall apply,
(2) In the case of civil servants with non -active status, subsection (1) above shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , for a period not extending beyond the date of their final voluntary or 
compulsory retirement.  
(3) A tempo rary civil servant undergoing practical professional training who is elected to the 
Bundestag shall be granted unpaid leave on request. If, after passing the professional 
examination, the trainee is appointed as a probationary civil servant, his or her rig hts and 
duties in the latter capacity shall be suspended pursuant to subsection (1) above from the 
date on which the appointment takes effect.  
Section 6  
Reinstatement after expiry of a mandate  
(1) When a civil servant ceases to be a Member of the Bundestag , his or her rights and 
duties as a civil servant shall remain suspended for a maximum of six months. On 
application, which must be made within three months from the end of his or her term of 
office, the civil servant shall be reinstated within three month s from the date of the 
application. The category within the career structure to which the civil servant is appointed 
must be the same as, or equivalent to, his or her former category and must attract at least 
the same final basic salary. He or she shall re ceive the emoluments payable in respect of his 
or her former position with effect from the date of  application for reinstatement.  
(2) If the civil servant does not make his or her application within three months from the end 
of his or her membership of the  Bundestag in accordance with subsection (1) above, the 
rights and duties arising from membership of the civil service shall remain suspended 
(section 5(1) of this Act) until the date of voluntary or compulsory retirement.  If, however, the 
civil servant h as neither been a Member of the Bundestag for at least two electoral terms nor
(section 5(1) of this Act) until the date of voluntary or compulsory retirement.  If, however, the 
civil servant h as neither been a Member of the Bundestag for at least two electoral terms nor 
reached his or her fifty -fifth birthday on ceasing to be a Member of the Bundestag, the
highest administrative authority may reinstate the civil servant by appointing him or her  to a 
position in accordance with the third sentence of subsection (1) above; if the civil servant 
refuses reinstatement or fails to take up the appointment, he or she shall be dismissed. The 
second sentence above shall not apply if, during his or her memb ership of the Bundestag, 
the civil servant was a member of the Federal Government.  
Section 7  
Seniority in the public service  
(1) By way of derogation from the third sentence of section 27(3) of the Federal Pay Act 
(Bundesbesoldungsgesetz ) and without preju dice to section 23(5) of the present Act, the 
period of membership of the Bundestag shall delay a federal civil servant's accrual of 
seniority on the pay scale to the extent that the application, mutatis mutandis , of section 
28(1) and (2) of the Federal Pa y Act as amended prior to 30 June 2009 has such effect.  
(2) If the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position in accordance with section 
6 of this Act, the accrual of seniority on the pay scale shall be suspended for the period from 
the end of his or her membership of the Bundestag until the date on which a pension 
becomes payable. If the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position in 
accordance with section 6 of this Act, his or her basic pay shall remain at the point o n the 
pay scale indicated by paragraph 1 above until he or she becomes eligible to draw a 
pension.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 23(5) of this Act, the period of membership 
of the Bundestag shall not count towards the period of service  as defined in pensions 
legislation. The same shall apply with regard to the period after the Member’s term of office if 
the civil servant is not reinstated in his or her former position pursuant to section 6 of this 
Act. 
(4) Once a civil servant has cease d to be a Member of the Bundestag, his or her term of
(4) Once a civil servant has cease d to be a Member of the Bundestag, his or her term of 
office shall count towards the civil servant’s seniority in his or her present grade, excluding 
any probationary period.  
(5) In the case of public -service employees, once they cease to be Members of the  
Bundestag, their period of membership shall count towards their professional seniority and 
length of service; in the context of an existing supplementary retirement and surviving 
dependant’s pension, this shall only apply to provisions governing expectanc y or claims on 
the merits.  
Section 8  
Civil servants appointed for a fixed term, judges, members of the armed forces and 
public -service employees  
(1) Sections 5 to 7 of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to judges and to career 
members and fixed -term v olunteer members of the armed forces.  
(2) The rights and duties arising from engagement to serve for a fixed period in the armed 
forces shall be suspended for no longer than the period of the engagement, and those 
arising from appointment for a fixed perio d as a civil servant for no longer than  the period of 
the appointment.  
(3) Subsection (2) above and the provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7(1) to (4) shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , to public -service employees. Public service within the meaning of this 
provis ion is work performed in the service of the Federal Republic, one of its constituent 
states ( Länder ), a local authority or other body, institution or foundation established under 
public law or associations thereof, with the exception of public religious so cieties and 
associations thereof.  
Section 9  
University staff with civil -servant status  
(1) With regard to the legal status of university professors and assistant professors within the 
meaning of Section 42 of the Framework Act for Higher Education ( Hochsch ulrahmengesetz )
who are elected to the Bundestag, section 6 of the present Act shall apply, with the proviso 
that they must be reinstated in their former position at the same university.  
(2) During their term of office in the Bundestag, professors and assi stant professors may 
engage in research and teaching as well as providing assistance to doctoral and 
postdoctoral students. Remuneration for this work shall be calculated on the basis of actual 
performance. The remuneration may not exceed 25 per cent of th e income which would be 
paid under their contract of employment as professors or assistant professors. In all other 
respects, the provisions relating to federal civil servants shall apply.  
Section 10  
Electoral officials appointed for a fixed term  
The Lände r may enact legislation deviating from the regulations contained in section 6 of this 
Act in the case of electoral officials appointed for a fixed term.  
PART FOUR  
Benefits for Members of the Bundestag  
Section 11  
Members’ remuneration  
(1) A Member of the Bu ndestag shall receive a monthly remuneration based on the monthly 
income of a judge of the highest federal courts (salary group R6, as defined in Annex IV of 
the Federal Pay Act ( Bundesbesoldungsgesetz ), with the supplement for judges and public 
prosecutor s of the highest federal courts). A Member’s remuneration shall be 10,083.47 
euros. The procedure prescribed in subsections (4) and (5) below shall apply to subsequent 
adjustments.  
(2) The President of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly supplementary al lowance of one 
month’s salary as specified in subsection (1) above, his or her deputies shall receive a 
monthly supplementary allowance amounting to half of the monthly salary specified in 
subsection (1) above, and the chairpersons of committees, committee s of inquiry, study 
commissions and the Parliamentary Oversight Panel shall receive a monthly supplementary 
allowance corresponding to 15 per cent of the monthly amount specified in subsection (1) 
above.
allowance corresponding to 15 per cent of the monthly amount specified in subsection (1) 
above.  
(3) The amount of a Member’s remuneration and of th e supplementary allowance shall be 
reduced by one three -hundred and sixty -fifth on account of grants towards the cost of 
nursing care awarded under section 27 of this Act from 1 January 1995.  
(4) The monthly remuneration specified in subsection (1) above s hall be adjusted annually 
on 1 July.* The basis shall be the development of the index of nominal earnings computed 
by the Federal Statistical Office, which the President of the Federal Statistical Office shall 
transmit to the President of the Bundestag by 31 March of each year. The latter shall publish 
the adjusted amount of remuneration in a Bundestag printed paper.  
(5) The adjustment procedure prescribed by subsection (4) above shall continue to apply in a 
new electoral term only if the Bundestag adopts a  decision to that effect within three months 
following the constituent sitting. If no decision is taken within that time, the last amount 
computed in accordance with subsection (4) above shall apply to Members’ remuneration 
until the Bundestag confirms or amends the adju stment procedure in a law.  
 
Footnote *:  With effect from 1 July 2021 the monthly remuneration amounts to 10,012.89 
euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
Section 12  
Members’ allowances  
(1) To cover costs incurred in conne ction with the exercise of his or her parliamentary 
mandate, a Member of the Bundestag shall receive various compensatory allowances. 
These shall comprise monetary allowances and benefits in kind.
(2) A Member of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly expen se allowance to cover, in 
particular,  
1. office expenses for the establishment and upkeep of a constituency office 
outside the seat of the German Bundestag, including rent and utility and service charges, 
stock and office materials, literature and other co mmunication media and postage,  
2. additional expenditure incurred at the seat of the Bundestag and travel 
expenses, excluding the cost of official trips abroad,  
3. travel costs for trips in connection with the exercise of his or her mandate within 
the Fede ral Republic of Germany, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 16 and 
17 of this Act, and  
4. additional expenses for other costs incurred in connection with the exercise of a 
parliamentary mandate (representative functions, invitations, constitue ncy work, etc.) 
which are not otherwise defrayable from the professional remuneration and allowances 
paid to cover the cost of living.  
The expense allowance shall be adjusted each year on 1 January in line with the increase in 
the general cost of living of  all households in the previous year. * Details of the amount of the 
estimates for the individual flat -rate allowance, based on actual expenditure, and the amount 
of the adjustment shall be governed by the Budget Act ( Haushaltsgesetz ) and by 
implementing pr ovisions which shall be enacted by the Council of Elders ( Ältestenrat ). 
(3) On submission of evidence, a Member of the Bundestag shall receive reimbursement for 
employing staff to assist him or her in carrying out his or her parliamentary work. Entitlement  
to this reimbursement is not transferable to another Member of the Bundestag. 
Reimbursement of expenditure in respect of employment contracts concluded with staff who 
are or were married or related by blood or marriage to the Member of the Bundestag is no t 
permissible. The same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to employment contracts concluded 
with the civil partner or former civil partner of a Member of the Bundestag. Details of the 
reimbursable amount of expenditure and the conditions of reimbursement, the  mandatory
reimbursable amount of expenditure and the conditions of reimbursement, the  mandatory 
minimum requirements for the employment contract and other matters shall be governed by 
the Budget Act and the implementing provisions to be enacted by the Council of Elders. 
Salaries and other staff expenditure shall be paid by the Bundestag Ad ministration. The 
Bundestag shall not be liable to third parties. The staff shall not be public servants. No 
contractual relationship shall exist between the staff and the Bundestag Administration.  
(3a) Reimbursement is excluded for staff activities which do not serve to provide assistance 
in the performance of parliamentary work and which therefore must not be performed during 
working hours. The Presidium may impose a fine of up to half of the annual Member’s 
remuneration on any Member of the Bundestag who  contravenes this rule. The President 
shall validate this fine by means of an administrative act. The foregoing shall be without 
prejudice to section 31 of this Act. Details are laid down in the Code of Conduct set out in 
Part Eleven of this Act.   
(4) Mem bers’ allowances shall also include:  
1. the provision of a fully equipped office at the seat of the Bundestag,  
2. the use of transport facilities in accordance with section 16 of this Act,  
3. the use of official Bundestag vehicles,  
4. the provision and use of the common information and communication system of the 
Bundestag, and  
5. other Bundestag services.  
Details shall be regulated by the Budget Act and by implementing provisions which shall be 
enacted by the Council of Elders.
(5) The President of the Bundestag shall receive a monthly official expense allowance of 
1,023 euros, and his or her deputies shall receive a monthly official expense allowance of 
307 euros.  
(6) A Member of the Bundestag who has the exclusive use of an official car shall receive a n 
expense allowance reduced by 25 per cent.  
 
Footnote *:  With effect from 1 January 2021 the expense allowance amounts to 4,560.59 
euros (Federal Gazette, official section, 2 November 2020, B1).  
Section 13  
Non-entitlement to reimbursement of expenses  
A Mem ber of the Bundestag elected to the Bundestag in the last quarter of the last year of 
an electoral term shall not have a right to benefits under section 12(2) and (3) of this Act if 
the Bundestag has already completed its work.  
Section 14  
Reduction of the expense allowance  
 (1) An attendance register shall be displayed on each sitting day. The President shall 
determine, in consultation with the Council of Elders, which days count as sitting days and 
the time during which the attendance register is to be dis played. If a Member of the 
Bundestag does not enter his or her name in the register, 100 euros shall be deducted from 
his or her expense allowance. The amount of the reduction shall be increased to 200 euros if 
a Member who has not been granted leave of ab sence fails to enter his or her name in the 
attendance register on the day of a plenary sitting. The amount of the deduction shall be 
reduced to 20 euros if a Member of the Bundestag presents a medical certificate attesting to 
a stay in hospital or in a sa natorium or to temporary incapacitation. During the period of 
maternity protection in the event of pregnancy or if a Member of the Bundestag has a child 
under the age of 14 living in his or her household who is certified ill by a doctor and for whom 
the Me mber must care personally because no other responsible person is available in the 
household to do so, the Member’s failure to enter his or her name in the attendance register
household to do so, the Member’s failure to enter his or her name in the attendance register 
shall not result in a reduction of the expense allowance. From the time when the attendance 
register is displayed, performance of the duties of President or Secretary, a minuted request 
to speak at a sitting of the German Bundestag, the use of a personal voting card in a 
recorded vote, participation in a roll -call vote, entry in the at tendance register of a committee 
or other body of the Bundestag, interventions at a meeting of a committee or other body of 
the Bundestag, entry in the attendance register of the Council of Elders or participation in an 
approved official trip on the day of  the sitting shall count as entr y in the attendance register.  
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who fails to cast a vote by voting card or roll -call shall have 
100 euros deducted from his or her monthly expense allowance. This shall not apply if the 
President has granted the Member leave of absence, if a deduction is made under 
subsection (1) above or in the circumstances described in the sixth sentence of subsection 
(1) above.  
Section 15  
Receipt of other per diem  or attendance allowances  
If a Member of the Bun destag receives a per diem  or attendance allowance from other public 
funds on the same day that he or she has entered his or her name on the Bundestag 
attendance register, 20 euros or the amount of the attendance allowance paid out of the 
other public fund s, whichever is the lesser, shall be deducted from his or her monthly 
expense allowance. The same shall apply to official trips abroad which fall on the day of a 
sitting.  
Section 16  
Right to free use of public transport and reimbursement of travel costs
(1) A Member of the Bundestag shall have the right to free use of all transport facilities of the 
rail operator Deutsche Bahn AG. If, in the exercise of his or her mandate in the Federal 
Republic of Germany, a Member uses internal flights, sleeping -cars or o ther forms of rail 
transport beyond the scope of local public transport networks, the cost shall be reimbursed 
up to the highest class on production of receipts.  
(2) For the duration of his or her entitlement to free travel, a Member of the Bundestag may 
not accept reimbursement of travel costs for domestic trips with Deutsche Bahn AG from any 
other source. The same shall apply to domestic travel undertaken as part of a trip abroad 
and to expenditure on flights and sleeping -cars where such expenditure is re imbursed under 
subsection (1) above.  
Section 17  
Official trips  
(1) Official trips shall require the prior approval of the President.  
(2) In the case of domestic trips, daily subsistence expenses shall be deemed to have been 
reimbursed through the expense allowance. By virtue of the application, mutatis mutandis , of 
the Federal Travel Expenses Act ( Bundesreisekostengesetz ), however, a Member of the 
Bundestag shall receive, on request, an overnight accommodation allowance as well as the 
reimbursement of his or her travel expenses. If a Member of the Bundestag proves that he or 
she has incurred an unusual level of expenditure, which cannot be covered by the overnight 
accommodation allowance, the unavoidable excess shall be reimbursed.  
(3) In the case of offici al trips abroad, a Member shall receive, on request, per diem  and 
overnight accommodation allowances. In addition, the following shall also be reimbursed:  
- in the case of rail travel, the cost of return travel from the federal border to the 
destination, a s well as the cost of a sleeping car, on production of receipts;  
- in the case or air travel, the attested cost of travel to and from the destination;   
- the cost of necessary travel by other means of transport.
- the cost of necessary travel by other means of transport.  
(4) On application, in the cases referred t o in subsections (2) and (3) above, a mileage 
payment shall be awarded in lieu of travel costs. It must not exceed the amount of 
expenditure which would have been reimbursable for travel by air under section 16(1) or 
section 17(3) of this Act. The amount o f the mileage payment shall be determined by the 
Council of Elders.  
(5) In all other respects, the provisions of the Federal Travel Expenses Act, as amended, 
shall apply, mutatis mutandis , unless otherwise determined by the Council of Elders.  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members  of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 18  
Transitional emoluments  
(1) An outgoing Member with at least one year of membership shall receive transitional 
emoluments. The transitional emoluments, amounting to the Mem bers’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act, shall be paid for one month for each year of 
membership, up to a maximum of eighteen months. Periods of earlier membership of the 
Bundestag for which transitional emoluments have already been paid are not reckonable. 
Membership of the Bundestag lasting more than half a year shall be regarded as a full year 
for the purposes of the calculation describe d in the second sentence above.  
(2) From the second month after the date of severance from the Bundes tag, all earned 
income and pension benefits shall be set off against the transitional emoluments. Income 
from membership of the European Parliament shall not be set off against these emoluments 
if the European Parliament already makes provision for the tra nsitional emoluments to be set 
off against its own remuneration.
(3) On request, the transitional emoluments referred to in subsection (1) above may be paid 
as a single gratuity, or monthly at half the prescribed amount for double the prescribed 
period. Th e third sentence of subsection (1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(4) If the former Member re -enters the Bundestag, his or her entitlement to monthly 
payments under subsection (1) above shall be suspended. If the former Member has 
received the transitional  emoluments in the form of a gratuity, he or she shall repay the 
amount that would have accrued after the date of re -entry if he or she had been receiving 
monthly payments. The President shall determine the instalments in which this amount is to 
be repaid.  
(5) If a former Member dies, the benefits referred to in subsection (1) above shall continue to 
be paid to the surviving spouse, to the civil partner and to the former Member’s natural and 
adopted children or shall be left to them if no pension rights hav e accrued under this Act.  
(6) A former Member who belongs to the European Parliament may only claim his or her 
transitional emoluments after severance from the European Parliament.  
(7) Subsection (1) above shall not apply if the Member loses his or her mem bership of the 
Bundestag on the basis of section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Act. The President of the 
Bundestag may suspend payments if there are likely to be proceedings which give rise to the 
consequences described in section 15(2)(2) of the Feder al Electoral Act.  
Section 19  
Entitlement to receive superannuation benefits  
(1) After leaving the Bundestag, a Member shall receive superannuation benefits when he or 
she reaches his or her 67th birthday, provided that he or she belonged to the Bundestag f or 
at least one year.  
(2) Members of the Bundestag born before 1 January 1947 shall attain pensionable age on 
reaching their 65th birthday. For Members of the Bundestag born after 31 December 1946, 
pensionable age shall be raised as follows:
pensionable age shall be raised as follows:  
 
Year of birth  Increase (in months)  New pensionable age  
years  months  
1947  1 65 1 
1948  2 65 2 
1949  3 65 3 
1950  4 65 4 
1951  5 65 5 
1952  6 65 6 
1953  7 65 7 
1954  8 65 8 
1955  9 65 9 
1956  10 65 10 
1957  11 65 11 
1958  12 66 0 
1959  14 66 2 
1960  16 66 4 
1961  18 66 6 
1962  20 66 8 
1963  22 66 10 
 
 
(3) If a former Member belonged to the Bundestag for two or more non -consecutive periods, 
the periods shall be added together. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis .
(4) Upon app lication, superannuation benefits may be drawn early with effect from the former 
Member’s 63rd birthday. In this case, the superannuation benefits shall be reduced by 0.3 of 
a percentage point for each month prior to the pensionable age defined in subsecti ons (1) 
and (2) above in which superannuation benefits were drawn. Reckonability within the 
meaning of section 29 shall apply to the amount of superannuation benefits reduced 
pursuant to the second sentence of the present subsection.  
 
Until the date of the  first sitting of the 19th Bundestag, the following version of subsection 3 
above applied:  
 
(3) If a former Member belonged to the Bundestag for two or more non -consecutive periods, 
the periods shall be added together. With each year of membership of the B undestag 
beyond the eighth year, the right to receive superannuation benefits shall accrue one year 
earlier. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefi ts shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this Act). From 1 January 2008, the rate of increase shall be two and a half 
per cent of the Members’ remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of 
membership . The maximum rate at which superannuation benefits are payable shall be 65 
per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall form the 
basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two sentence s 
above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration specified in 
section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
 
Until the date of the first sitting of the 19th Bundestag, the following version applied:  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this Act). From 1 January 2008, the rate of increase shall be two and a half 
per cent of the M embers’ remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of 
membership. The maximum rate at which superannuation benefits are payable shall be 67.5 
per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall form the 
basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two sentences 
above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration specified in 
section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Sect ion 21  
Reckonability of periods in other Parliaments  
(1) On application, periods of service in the Parliament of a constituent state ( Land ) of the 
Federal Republic of Germany shall be regarded as periods of membership within the 
meaning of section 19 of th is Act. If the conditions for entitlement under this Act are thereby 
fulfilled, superannuation benefits shall be paid.  
(2) With regard to the amount of superannuation benefits, the provisions of section 20 shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis , to each year of act ual membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subject to the submission of an application to the President of the Bundestag by 30 June 
1996 (exclusion deadline), periods of membership of the People’s Chamber ( Volkskammer ) 
of the former German Democratic Republic fr om the date of acceptance of a mandate after 
the elections to the Volkskammer for its tenth legislative term until 2 October 1990 shall be 
regarded as periods of membership of the Bundestag. The fourth sentence of section 18(1) 
shall apply, mutatis mutandi s.  In the case of an application made under the first sentence 
above in which a period of membership of the Volkskammer is indicated, the application
shall be processed retroactively as regards pension expectancy and entitlements accruing 
during that peri od of membership.  
Section 22  
Damage to health  
(1) If a Member suffered damage to his or her health when serving in the Bundestag, except 
through his or her own gross negligence, and if the Member’s ability to work is thereby 
permanently and seriously impai red to the extent that that he or she can no longer fulfil his or 
her mandate or, on leaving the Bundestag, return to the occupation which he or she had 
before election to the Bundestag or engage in any other reasonable occupation, he or she 
shall, on appl ication and irrespective of the conditions set out in section 19 of this Act, 
receive superannuation benefits with effect from the month in which the application is made; 
the amount of these benefits shall be calculated in accordance with section 20 but sh all be 
no less than 30 per cent of the remuneration payable under section 11(1). If the damage to 
the Member’s health is the result of an accident, the assessment basis described in section 
20 shall be increased by 20 per cent but shall not exceed the maxi mum rate for the payment 
of superannuation benefits.  
(2) If a former Member of the Bundestag who, irrespective of age, fulfils the conditions under 
section 19 of this Act with regard to length of service suffers damage to health within the 
meaning of subs ection (1) above, he or she shall receive superannuation benefits, the 
amount of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The damage to health must be substantiated by a report from a medical institution 
governed by public law. This re port shall be superseded by a notice of award in respect of a 
pension for reduction of earning capacity, occupational disability or incapacity for 
employment or by a notice of invalidity as defined in civil -service law.  
Section 23  
Compensatory severance p ayment  
(1) A Member who, on leaving the Bundestag, has acquired neither expectancy rights nor 
entitlement to superannuation benefits under sections 19 to 22 of this Act shall, on
entitlement to superannuation benefits under sections 19 to 22 of this Act shall, on 
application, receive a compensatory severance payment for the period of his o r her 
membership of the Bundestag. It shall be paid in respect of each month of membership of 
the Bundestag commenced and shall be equal in amount to the maximum contribution to the 
general pension scheme in each of the months in question plus twenty per c ent of the said 
maximum contribution.  
(2) Instead of the severance payment, Members who fulfil the conditions defined in 
subsection (1) above may also apply to buy in the period of their membership of the 
Bundestag in implementation, mutatis mutandis , of t he provisions of the Sixth Book of the 
German Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch ) relating to retroactive insurance.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to supplementary retirement and 
surviving dependants’ pensions.  
(4) Subsection (2) shal l not apply if and in so far as the period of membership of the 
Bundestag has been accounted for or will be accounted for under an insurance scheme 
governed by public law or in a pension awarded on the basis of service regulations.  
(5) Instead of the sever ance payment referred to in subsection (1) above, the period of 
membership of the Bundestag may, on application, be counted as a period of reckonable 
service within the meaning of the legislation governing the pay and pensions of civil 
servants, judges and  members of the armed forces.  
(6) If a Member has made an application under subsections (1) to (3) or subsection (5) 
above, the accumulation of the qualifying periods of membership specified in section 19 of 
this Act shall be resumed in the event of his or  her re -entering the Bundestag.
above, the accumulation of the qualifying periods of membership specified in section 19 of 
this Act shall be resumed in the event of his or  her re -entering the Bundestag.  
(7) If a former Member dies without having made an application for a compensatory 
severance payment, his or her surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, his or her
natural or adopted children may make an applica tion in accordance with  subsection (1) 
above.       
(8) Subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to an outgoing Member of 
the Parliament of a Land if the legislation of the Land provides for a compensatory 
severance payment within the meaning of subsection (1) above.  
(9) If a Member of a Land  Parliament loses his or her membership but has no entitlement or 
accrued rights to a lump -sum payment or regular pension benefits in respect of his or her 
period of membership, subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 24  
Transitional allowance for surviving dependants  
(1) The surviving dependants of a Member of the Bundestag shall receive the payments 
provided for by this Act but not yet disbursed, on condition that they  were due at the time of 
death. The surviving spouse, civil partner and offspring shall receive a transitional allowance 
equal to the amount of Members’ remuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. The 
transitional allowance shall amount to one an d a half times the Members’ remuneration 
payable under section 11(1) in cases where the deceased was a Member for more than 
eight years or more than two electoral terms. If there are no surviving dependants within the 
meaning of the second sentence above, the transitional allowance shall be granted to other 
persons who bore the costs arising from the final illness, up to the amount of the expenditure 
they incurred. The amount of transitional allowance payable shall be reduced by 1,050 euros 
with effect from  31 March 2004.  
(2) The same shall apply in the event of the death of a former Member of the Bundestag who 
fulfils the conditions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act and was 
not yet receiving superannuation benefits at the time  of death.  
Section 25  
Surviving dependants’ pension  
(1) The surviving spouse or civil partner of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag
(1) The surviving spouse or civil partner of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag 
shall receive sixty per cent of the appropriate superannuation benefits, provided the 
deceased was entitled to supe rannuation benefits at the time of death or fulfilled the 
conditions for the award of superannuation benefits.  
(2) The surviving spouse or civil partner of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag, 
who, irrespective of age, fulfilled the conditions rela ting to duration of membership under 
section 19 of this Act shall receive sixty per cent of the superannuation benefits, the amount 
of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The natural and adopted children of a former Member who woul d have received 
superannuation benefits at the time of his or her death, or of a deceased Member or a 
deceased recipient of superannuation benefits, shall each receive an orphan’s pension. If the 
children are orphans, the pension shall amount to twenty per  cent of the superannuation 
benefits referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above; if they still have one parent, the 
children shall receive an orphan’s pension amounting to twelve per cent of the said benefits.  
(4) In the event of the death of a Member o f the Bundestag who has belonged to the 
Bundestag for less than fourteen years, the surviving spouse shall receive sixty per cent, 
each orphan twenty per cent and each child with one surviving parent twelve per cent of the 
superannuation benefits payable t o a Member with thirteen years’ reckonable service.  
Section 25a  
Pension -rights adjustment  
(1) Expectancy rights for each benefit scheme shall be divided between spouses in the event 
of divorce.  
(2) Implementation shall be governed by the Act concerning the  Scheme -based Sharing of 
Entitlements in Civil -service Pensions Law Accruing to Federal Civil Servants under
Statutory Adjustment of Pension Rights (Federal Statutory Pension -sharing Act – 
Bundesversorgungsteilungsgesetz ), mutatis mutandis .   
(3) The asses sment of superannuation benefits shall be effected in accordance with section 
39 of the Pension Rights Adjustment Act ( Versorgungsausgleichgesetz ).  
Section 25b  
Cost-saving measures with regard to pension entitlements  
(1) In the conditions described in sec tion 25 of this Act, the surviving spouse or civil partner 
shall receive fifty -five per cent of the relevant superannuation benefits. This shall not apply in 
the case of couples married or civil partnerships entered into prior to 28 December 2004 if at 
least one of the spouses or civil partners had reached his or her fortieth birthday on or before 
that date.  
(2) In the case of persons with an entitlement under section 27(1) of this Act, benefits 
payable under sections 18, 19, 21, 22 and 25 shall be reduced  by the half percentage point 
of annual income referred to in the first sentence of section 55(1) of the Eleventh Book of the 
Social Code or by the half percentage point of the income ceiling for the assessment of 
contributions to nursing -care insurance (s ection 55(2) of the Eleventh Book of the Social 
Code) referred to in the first sentence of section 55(1) of the Eleventh Book of the Social 
Code, whichever is the lesser.  
(3) With effect from the first adjustment to Members’ remuneration under section 11( 1) of this 
Act after 28 December 2004, the assessment rate used in the calculation of superannuation 
benefits accruing up to 31 December 2007 shall be reduced by half a percentage point for 
each year of membership up to and including the fourth adjustment.   
(4) With effect from the first adjustment to the notional assessment figure for superannuation 
benefits under the third sentence of section 35a(2) of this Act, the assessment rate used 
pursuant to section 20 in the calculation of superannuation benefits payable under Parts Five
pursuant to section 20 in the calculation of superannuation benefits payable under Parts Five 
and Nine of this Act as amended prior to 22 December 1995 shall be reduced by half a 
percentage point for each year of membership up to and including the eighth adjustment.  
(5) For Members who belong to the Bundestag in the 16th a nd/or subsequent electoral 
terms, section 29(3) shall also apply, mutatis mutandis , to private earned income until they 
reach the age specified in section 19(1) or (2), as appropriate.   
Section 26  
Application of civil -service regulations  
Without prejudice  to any contrary provision contained in this Act, the provisions of  pensions 
legislation relating to federal civil servants shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . Section 53(8) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ) shall apply, mutatis  mutandis , 
to the concept of employment in the public service within the meaning of the present section.  
PART SIX  
Subsidisation of costs in the event of illness, nursing care and births; assistance  
Section 27  
Subsidisation of costs in the event of illness,  nursing care and births  
(1) Members of the Bundestag shall receive a grant towards necessary costs incurred as a 
result of illness, nursing care and births in application, mutatis mutandis , of the provisions 
applicable to federal civil servants. This shal l also apply to recipients of pensions awarded 
under this Act, provided that they do not have a right to claim assistance on the basis of a 
contract of employment or membership of another legislative body and that the right to make 
such a claim against the  Bundestag under this Act has not been waived in writing.  
(2) Instead of the entitlement to a grant under subsection (1) above, Members and recipients 
of pensions shall receive a subsidy towards their health -insurance contributions if their
(2) Instead of the entitlement to a grant under subsection (1) above, Members and recipients 
of pensions shall receive a subsidy towards their health -insurance contributions if their 
employer does n ot make contributions pursuant to Section 249 of the Fifth Book of the Social 
Code or if there is no entitlement to a contribution subsidy under section 257 of the Fifth
Book of the Social Code. Members of the statutory health -insurance scheme who receive a 
pension from the statutory pensions scheme and who either pay only half of the health -
insurance contribution pursuant to section 249a of the Fifth Book of the Social Code or who 
receive a contribution subsidy pursuant to section 106 of the Sixth Book of the Social Code 
shall not receive a subsidy towards this pension -related health -insurance contribution. The 
subsidy shall be half of the health -insurance contribution paid from the individual’s own 
means, by analogy with section 249 of the Fifth Book of th e Social Code. For those not 
insured exclusively by a statutory health -insurance fund as defined in section 4 of the Fifth 
Book of the Social Code, the maximum amount of the subsidy shall be half of the amount 
specified in section 249 of the Fifth Book of the Social Code.  
(3) The entitlement to the subsidy towards health -insurance contributions under subsection 
(2) above shall include, for Members of the Bundestag, entitlement to a subsidy amounting 
to half of the contributions to private nursing -care insur ance paid from an individual’s own 
means or half of the maximum contribution to the state nursing -care insurance scheme, 
whichever is the lesser. The subsidy shall not include the contribution supplement for 
childless persons prescribed by section 55 of th e Eleventh Book of the Social Code.  
(4) The decision as to whether the Member wishes to claim the subsidy under subsection (2) 
above instead of the benefits under subsection (1) must be notified to the President of the 
Bundestag within four months from th e date on which the election result was established by 
the Federal Electoral Committee (first sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act 
(Bundeswahlgesetz )), or on which a permanent civil servant accepted his or her mandate; 
the decision shall be irrevocable for the duration of the electoral term. Recipients of pensions 
must inform the President of their decision within four months of notification of the pension 
award; they shall remain bound by their decision.  
Section 28  
Assistance
award; they shall remain bound by their decision.  
Section 28  
Assistance  
In special c ases, the President may grant assistance in the form of a single lump sum to a 
Member of the Bundestag and assistance in the form of a single lump sum or a regular 
maintenance allowance to a former Member and his or her surviving dependants.  
PART SEVEN  
Reckonability of concurrent benefits  from public funds  
Section 29  
Reckonability of concurrent benefits from public funds  
(1) If a Member of the Bundestag, in addition to the remuneration referred to in section 11 of 
this Act, is also entitled to receive incom e in respect of the tenure of public office or from 
employment in the public service, the remuneration payable under section 11 shall be 
reduced by fifty per cent; the amount of the reduction may not, however, exceed thirty per 
cent of the said income. The  same shall apply to income from the tenure of public office or 
from employment in the public service with an intergovernmental or international institution. 
The Member’s remuneration shall be suspended in full where there is a concurrent 
entitlement to re muneration under the act of a Land  concerning the legal status of Members 
of its Parliament. The payments referred to in the second and third sentences above shall 
not be reckonable if the legislation of the relevant Land  or the rules of the relevant 
intergovernmental or international institution already provide for deduction in respect of the 
income or suspension of remuneration payable for exercising a mandate in the Land  
Parliament.  
(2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to Members’ remuneration und er section 11(1) of 
the present Act, pension benefits to which a Member is entitled by virtue of the tenure of
Parliament.  
(2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to Members’ remuneration und er section 11(1) of 
the present Act, pension benefits to which a Member is entitled by virtue of the tenure of 
public office or employment in the public service shall be partially suspended, the suspended 
entitlement corresponding to eighty per cent of the  said pension benefits or the amount of 
remuneration payable under section 11(1) and (3), whichever is the lesser. The same shall
apply, mutatis mutandis , to fifty per cent of the amount of pensions within the meaning of the 
second sentence of section 55(1 ) of the Civil Service Benefits Act 
(Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ), with the exception of pensions from a compulsory insurance 
scheme if payable to an exempted person who opted into the scheme on application 
pursuant to section 4(2) of Book Six of the Social C ode; section 55(3) and (4) of the Civil 
Service Benefits Act shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . The transitional emoluments 
payable under the Federal Ministers Act ( Gesetz über die Rechtsverhältnisse der Mitglieder 
der Bundesregierung ) and the Parliamenta ry State Secretaries Act (Gesetz über die 
Rechtsverhältnisse der Parlamentarischen Staatssekretäre) which remain after the 
application of the other provisions on the reckonability and suspension of benefits shall be 
suspended from the second month after de parture from office if there is a concurrent 
entitlement to Members’ remuneration under section 11. If entitlement to a pension as 
defined in the first or second sentences above is founded on the law of a Land , the 
suspension of the pension entitlement sha ll be superseded by the suspension of an amount 
of Members’ remuneration to be determined on the basis of the first or second sentence 
above. The same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to pension entitlements deriving from the 
tenure of office or from employm ent in the public service with an intergovernmental  or 
international institution.  
(3) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to income from the tenure of public office or from 
employment in the public service, entitlement to pension benefits under this Ac t shall be 
partially suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to fifty per cent of the amount 
by which the pension entitlements plus the income exceed the amount of Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. The same shall app ly, mutatis 
mutandis , to income from the tenure of public office or employment in the public service with
mutandis , to income from the tenure of public office or employment in the public service with 
an intergovernmental or international institution.  
(4) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from the tenure of 
public o ffice or from employment in the public service, entitlement to pension benefits under 
the present Act shall be partially suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to 
fifty per cent of the amount by which the pension benefits under the present Act plus those 
arising from the tenure of public office or from employment in the public service exceed the 
amount of Members’ remuneration payable under Section 11(1) of the present Act. The 
same shall apply, mutatis mutandis , in the case of the receipt of a pension arising from the 
tenure of public office or employment in the public service with an intergovernmental or 
international institution. Pensions within the meaning of the second sentence of section 55(1) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenverso rgungsgesetz ) shall be set off in the same 
way, with the exception of pensions from a compulsory insurance scheme if payable to an 
exempted person who opted into the scheme on application pursuant to section 4(2) of Book 
Six of the Social Code; the fourth and fifth sentences of section 55(1), as well as subsections 
(3), (4) and (8), of the Civil Service Benefits Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration arising from membership of the 
Bundestag, of the Eur opean Parliament or of the Parliament of a Land , entitlement to 
pension benefits under this Act shall be partially suspended, the suspended entitlement 
corresponding to the amount by which this remuneration exceeds the Members’ 
remuneration payable under S ection 11(1) of this Act.
corresponding to the amount by which this remuneration exceeds the Members’ 
remuneration payable under S ection 11(1) of this Act.  
(6) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from membership of 
the Bundestag or of the Parliament of a Land , entitlement to pension benefits under this Act 
shall be partially suspended, the suspended en titlement corresponding to the amount by 
which the latter benefits exceed the maximum pension benefits payable under this Act. 
Where there is a concurrent entitlement to pension benefits arising from membership of the 
European Parliament, entitlement to pe nsion benefits under this Act shall be partially 
suspended, the suspended entitlement corresponding to the amount of the European 
Parliament pension, unless the European Parliament has already specified that the pension 
benefits payable under this Act are to be set off against its own pensions.
(7) Except in the case of the pensions referred to in the third sentence of subsection (4) 
above, only the non -contributory element of pension benefits shall be reckonable. 
Subsections (1) to (4) shall not apply to p ayments made on the basis of rules governing 
annual payments under the legislation of a Land  or collective agreements. In the application 
of subsections (1) to (4) above, expense allowances, accident compensation, holiday pay 
and non -recurring payments sha ll be disregarded.  
(8) In the assessment of the reckonability ceilings defined in subsections (3) to (6) above, 
due account shall be taken of the supplementary allowance referred to in section 11(2) of 
this Act.  
(9) Employment in the public service and the  intergovernmental or international institutions 
referred to in the present provision shall be defined in accordance with section 53(8) of the 
Civil Service Benefits Act and the provisions enacted in connection therewith.  
PART EIGHT  
General provisions  
Sect ion 30  
(repealed)  
Section 31  
Waiver; transferability  
A waiver of the Members’ remuneration referred to in section 11 of this Act and the benefits 
referred to in section 12 and in Part Five, with the exception of section 18, is not permissible. 
The entitlem ents deriving from section 12 are not transferable. No more than half of the 
entitlement to Members’ remuneration under section 11 is transferable. In all other respects, 
the provisions of sections 850 et seq.  of the Code of Civil Procedure ( Zivilprozessor dnung ) 
shall apply.  
Section 32  
Commencement and expiry of entitlements; payment provisions  
 (1) The entitlements established by sections 11, 12, 16, 27 and 28 of this Act shall take 
effect from the date on which the Federal Electoral Committee establishes the result of the 
election (first sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act) or, in the case described 
in section 45(3) of the Federal Electoral Act, from the date on which the Member accepts his
in section 45(3) of the Federal Electoral Act, from the date on which the Member accepts his 
or her mandate, even if the electoral term of t he previous Bundestag has not yet expired. 
Expenditure related to the exercise of a mandate which an elected constituency candidate or 
a candidate elected from an electoral list in a Land  incurs between the election date and the 
date on which the Federal E lectoral Committee establishes the result of the election (first 
sentence of section 42(2) of the Federal Electoral Act) or, in the case described in section 
45(3) of the Federal Electoral Act, from the date on which the Member accepts his or her 
mandate i n connection with the assembly of the new Bundestag shall also be reimbursed.    
(2) Outgoing Members shall receive the Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 of 
this Act until the end of the month of severance and the monetary benefits referred to  in 
section 12(2) until the end of the following month. Entitlements under section 16 shall expire 
fourteen days after the date of severance from the Bundestag.  
(3) Reimbursement for the employment of staff shall be paid up to the end of the  month in 
which the electoral term expires. If a Member leaves the Bundestag during the electoral 
term, expenditure on the employment of staff shall be reimbursed until the end of the fifth 
month after the date of severance at the latest, unless the employment is termin ated at an 
earlier date.  
(4) Superannuation benefits shall be awarded from the first day of the month following the 
event giving rise to the entitlement until the end of the month in which the entitled person 
dies.
(5) Entitlement to superannuation benefit s shall be suspended during the period of 
entitlement to transitional allowance.  
(6) Superannuation benefits under this Act shall not be paid if the Member or former Member 
loses or would lose his or her membership of the Bundestag on the basis of Section 15(2)(2) 
of the Federal Electoral Act. Section 23 of the present Act shall apply for the period of 
membership of the Bundestag.  
(7) With regard to Members who leave the Bundestag after this Act has come into force, 
section 27 of this Act shall apply for t he period of their entitlement to a transitional allowance 
under section 18 or six mon ths, whichever is the greater.  
(8) The Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 and the monetary benefits 
payable under section 12(2) and sections 20 to 27 shall be  paid monthly in advance. If they 
are only payable in part, one thirtieth shall be paid for each calendar day.  
Section 33  
(repealed)  
Section 34  
Implementing provisions  
(1) Provided federal legislation empowers it to do so, the Council of Elders may issue 
implementing provisions relating to the legal status of Members of the Bundestag which shall 
be published by the President.  
(2) The Council of Elders may issue general administrative provisions relating to this Act.  
(3) The President shall publish the amoun t of the expense allowance.  
PART NINE  
Transitional provisions  
Section 35  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Eleventh Act Amending the Act on the Legal 
Status of Members of the Bundestag  
(1) The present Act shall apply without prejudice to pension en titlements and expectancy 
rights  predating the entry into force of the Eleventh Amendment Act. Section 29(4) of the 
present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , 
to surviving dependants of a recipient of supe rannuation benefits if the latter dies after the 
entry into force of the  Eleventh Amendment Act.
entry into force of the  Eleventh Amendment Act.  
(2) Pension entitlements and expectancy rights of former Members of the Bundestag who 
fulfilled the conditions relating to duration of membership prior to th e entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act and those of their surviving dependants shall be governed by the 
law hitherto in force. Section 29(4) of the present Act shall apply. The first and second 
sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to Me mbers of the Bundestag who belong to 
the Bundestag or to the Parliament of a Land  prior to the entry into force of the Eleventh 
Amendment Act as well as to their surviving dependants.  
(3) Former Members of the Bundestag who re -enter the Bundestag after the  entry into force 
of the Eleventh Amendment Act and who fulfil the conditions set out in sections 19 and 21 of 
the present Act prior to the amendment shall receive superannuation benefits under the law 
hitherto in force, subject to the proviso that four pe r cent of the remuneration referred to in 
section 11(1) shall be awarded for each year of membership after the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act until the maximum rate of superannuation benefits is reached. 
Section 29(4) shall apply. The first  and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis , to surviving dependants.  
(4) The pension expectancy arising under subsection (1) to (3) of the law hitherto in force 
shall form the basis of assessment for the pension entitlement if it is higher t han the pension 
expectancy arising under this Act.
Section 35a  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Nineteenth Amendment Act  
(1) The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force up to 22 December 1995 shall 
continue to apply to Members who b elonged to the Bundestag on 22 December 1995, former 
Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants. Section 25 b (1), (2) and (5) shall 
apply, mutatis mutandis .  
(2) In those cases referred to in subsection (1) above, a notional assessment figure  shall 
apply instead of the Members’ remuneration payable under section 11 of this Act. The 
assessment figure for transitional emoluments shall be set at 5,301 euros. The notional 
assessment figure for superannuation benefits shall be set at 11,683 Deutsch e Mark with 
effect from 1 July 2000, at 11,868 Deutsche Mark with effect from 1 January 2001, at 6,165 
euros with effect from 1 January 2002, at 6,263 euros with effect from 1 January 2003, at 
6,411 euros with effect from 1 January 2008, at 6,555 euros wit h effect from 1 January 2009, 
at 6,805 euros with effect from 1 January 2012, at 7,055 euros with effect from 1 January 
2013, at 7,410 euros with effect from 1 July 2014 and at 7,765 euros with effect from 1 
January 2015. For subsequent adjustments, the ad justment factor shall be determined on 
the basis of the procedure prescribed in sec tion 11(4) and (5) of this Act.*  
(3) Where section 29 applies to pension entitlements under this Act, the notional assessment 
figure for the superannuation benefits referred  to in subsection (2) above shall also be used 
as a basis in the cases referred to in subsection (1) above instead of the Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11.  
(4) Members of the thirteenth German Bundestag to whom subsection (1) above applies ma y 
opt for the provisions of Part Five, as amended by the Nineteenth Amendment Act, to be 
applied until their retirement from the Bundestag. This decision shall be binding. In the event
applied until their retirement from the Bundestag. This decision shall be binding. In the event 
that a Member dies prior to exercising his or her option, the more favo urable version shall 
apply.  
 
Footnote * : With effect from 1 July 2021 the notional assessment figure amounts to 
8,560.90 euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
Section 35b  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Twenty -seventh Amendme nt Act  
(1) The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force up to 31 December 2007 shall 
apply to entitlements and expectancy rights accruing to  Members of the Bundestag, former 
Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants up to 31 De cember 2007. Section 
19(1) and (2), the third sentence of section 20 and section 25b(3) shall apply , mutatis 
mutandis . 
(2) In those cases referred to in subsection (1) above, a separate notional assessment figure 
shall apply instead of the Members’ remuner ation payable under section 11 of this Act. This 
notional assessment figure shall be set at 7,174 euros with effect from 1 January 2008, at 
7,335 euros with effect from 1 January 2009, at 7,615 euros with effect from 1 January 2012, 
at 7,895 euros with eff ect from 1 January 2013, at 8,292 euros with effect from 1 July 2014 
and at 8,689 euros with effect from 1 January 2015. The foregoing provisions shall be 
without prejudice to section 35a. For subsequent adjustments, the adjustment factor shall be 
determin ed on the basis of the procedure prescribed in sec tion 11(4) and (5) of this Act.*  
(3) The minimum period prescribed in section 19 of this Act as amended prior to the entry 
into force of the Twenty -seventh Amendment Act shall not apply to the assessment of  
entitlements and expectancy rights of Members of the 16th Bundestag under subsection (1) 
above.  
(4) Where section 29 applies to pension entitlements under this Act, the notional assessment
entitlements and expectancy rights of Members of the 16th Bundestag under subsection (1) 
above.  
(4) Where section 29 applies to pension entitlements under this Act, the notional assessment 
figure for the superannuation benefits referred to in subsection ( 2) above shall also be 
applied in the cases referred to in subsection (1) above instead of the Members’ 
remuneration payable under section 11. In cases in which the pension entitlements derive
partly from the new legislation and partly from subsection (1) above, these parts shall be 
calculated with due regard to the figures obtained by applying the respective percentage 
ratios with which pensions are calculated on the basis of the notional assessment figure 
prescribed in subsection (2) above and the remuner ation prescribed by section 11.  
 
Footnote * : With effect from 1 July 2021 the notional assessment figure amounts to 
9,579.60 euros (Bundestag printed paper 19/28929 of 26 April 2021).  
 
Section 35c  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Thirtieth Amendme nt Act  
The provisions of Parts Five and Nine of this Act in force on the day of the first sitting of the 
19th Bundestag shall apply to entitlements and expectancy rights accruing to Members of 
the Bundestag, former Members of the Bundestag and their surviv ing dependants up to the 
date of the first meeting of the 19th Bundestag. The foregoing provision shall be without 
prejudice to sections 35a and 35b of this Act.  
Section 36  
Transitional provisions for public servants  
(1) A civil servant who has retired on  the basis of the Act of 11 May 1951 on the Legal Status 
of Public Servants Elected to the First German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den ersten Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - 
Federal Law Gazette I,  p. 297) or on the basis of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal 
Status of Public Servants Elected to the German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - Federal 
Law Gazette  I, p. 777), as amended by the Act of 21 August 1961 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 
1557) or on the basis of corresponding legislation of a Land  and who was elected to the
1557) or on the basis of corresponding legislation of a Land  and who was elected to the 
eighth Bundestag or to a later Bundestag, shall be regarded as having been re -appointed as 
a civil servant on simultaneous suspension of his or her rights and duties (section 5(1) of the 
present Act) with effect from the date of acceptance of election or from the date of entry into 
force of the present Act, whichever is the later, provided th at he or she still fulfils the general 
conditions for appointment as a civil servant. In all other respects, the entitlements accruing, 
prior to the entry into force of the present Act, under section 4 and the last sentence of 
section 4a of the Act of 4 Au gust 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the 
German Bundestag shall be preserved.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to judges, to career members and 
fixed-term volunteer members of the armed forces and to public -service employees.  
(3) In the case of former Members of the Bundestag, entitlements accruing under the Act of 
4 August 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the German Bundestag 
shall be preserved.  
Section 37  
Pensions for Members who retired  prior to 1968  
On application, the President shall award superannuation benefits and a surviving 
dependants’ pensions, pursuant to the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), dated 3 May 1968 (Federal Law Gazett e I, p. 334), as 
amended by Article VIII of the Act of 18 February 1977 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297), to a 
former Member who retired from the Bundestag prior to 1 January 1968 and to his or her 
surviving dependants with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 38  
Pensions for periods prior to the entry into force of this Act
(1) A Member of the Bundestag who leaves during the period between 1 January 1968 and 
the date of entry into force of the present Act and his or her surviving d ependants shall 
receive a pension under the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 
1968.  
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who belonged to the Bundestag prior to the date of entry into 
force of this Act and did not leave the Bundestag until  after that date shall receive 
superannuation benefits in accordance with this Act; his or her membership prior to the entry 
into force of this Act shall be reckonable service for the assessment of these benefits.  
(3) Instead of the superannuation benefits  awardable under subsection (2) above, the 
individual’s own contributions to superannuation benefits and the surviving dependants’ 
pension under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) shall be r eimbursed on application without payment of 
interest. In the latter case, periods of membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into 
force of the present Act shall not be taken into consideration in the determination of the 
superannuation benefits paya ble under this Act. In the cases described in section 23 of this 
Act, only half of the compensatory severance payment shall be awarded.  
(4) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, a Member 
of the Bundestag who fulfils the conditions of section 5(1) and section 7a(1) of the Act 
governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall receive, on 
application, a retirement pension under the said Act for the period of membership of the 
Bundestag prior to the entry into force of the present Act; for the period after the entry into 
force of the present Act came into force, superannuation benefits under this Act shall be 
awarded, subject to the proviso that five per cent of the Members’ remuneration under 
section 11(1)  is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after
section 11(1)  is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after 
the entry into force of this Act may not exceed sixteen years. The same shall apply in respect 
of surviving dependants.  
(5) The application referred to in subsections (3) and (4)  above must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the entry into force of this Act.  
Section 38a  
(1) On application, recipients of pensions awarded under sections 37 and 38(1) of this Act 
shall receive a pension in accordance with  Part Five instead of their current pension. The 
same applies to former Members who belonged to the Bundestag for at least six years 
before the entry into force of this Act and their surviving dependants. The last sentence of 
section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(2) Section 38(4) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to former Members who left the Bundestag 
prior to 1 April 1977 and subsequently re -entered. The application must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the date of re -entry into the German 
Bundestag. The same shall apply in respect of surviving dependants.  
Section 38b  
Surviving dependants’ pension in the event of the death of a   serving Member of the 
Bundestag  
On application, surviving dependants as defined in section 25(4) of the present Act whose 
insured event occurred during the period between 1 April 1977 and the date of entry into 
force of the Seventh Amendment Act shall receive a pension under section 25(4) of the 
present Act with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 39  
Reckonability of previous pension benefits  
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be 
reckonable benefits for the purposes of section 29(3) and (4) of the present Act.
(2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration or a pension arising from 
membership of the Parliament of a Land  (section 29(5) and (6) of the present Act), only t he 
non-contributory element of pension benefits payable under the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reckonable. Periods credited 
under section 21 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 
shall be regarded as contribution periods.  
Section 40  
Reduced compensatory severance payment  
For periods of membership to which the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) applies, half of the compensatory severa nce payment 
under section 23 of the present Act shall be awarded. In this case, the Member’s own 
insurance contributions under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members 
of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application.  
Section 41  
Continuation of life assurance  
Life-assurance policies in existence on the entry into force of this Act shall be continued, 
subject to reduction of superannuation benefits and widow’s or widower’s pension in 
accordance with the number and amount of monthly contributions made by the policyholder 
to the life -assurance fund since 1 January 1968.  
Section 42  
Conversion or cancellation of life assurance  
(1) A Member or former Member of the Bundestag who has opted for the continuation of 
insurance at the expense of  the Federal Republic under section 20 of the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) may convert or 
cancel the life -assurance policy.  
(2) In the case of conversion, there is the option of continuation at the ind ividual’s own 
expense or of non -contributory insurance, subject to reduction of superannuation benefits 
and widow’s or widower’s pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly
and widow’s or widower’s pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly 
contributions made by the policyholder to the life -assurance fund f rom 1 January 1968 until 
the end of the month in which the policy was converted or until the award of superannuation 
benefits.  
(3) In the event of cancellation of the insurance policy, the insured person shall be 
reimbursed with the redemption value based on his or her own contributions.  
Section 43  
Continued payment of transitional emoluments  
A former Member of the Bundestag receiving Members’ allowances under the Act governing 
the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) at the tim e of 
entry into force of the present Act shall retain this entitlement.  
Section 44  
Reckonable service for transitional emoluments  
Periods of Membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into force of this Act shall count 
towards the period for which tran sitional emoluments are payable.  
PART TEN  
Independence of Members of the Bundestag  
Section 44a  
Independence of the mandate
(1) The exercise of the mandate of a Member of the Bundestag shall be central to his or her 
activity. Without prejudice to this oblig ation, activities of a professional or other nature 
alongside the exercise of the mandate are permissible in principle.  
(2) For the exercise of his or her mandate, a Member of the Bundestag may not accept any 
consideration besides those for which the law p rovides or any other pecuniary benefit. In 
particular, it is inadmissible to accept money or gifts with monetary value which are 
recognisably only granted in the expectation that the interests of the payer will be 
represented and asserted in the Bundestag.  It is also inadmissible for a Member of the 
Bundestag to accept money or gifts with monetary value if that benefit is granted for lecturing 
in connection with the exercise of the Member’s mandate or if he or she does not render an 
appropriate service in r eturn. The foregoing provisions shall be without prejudice to the 
receipt of gifts with monetary value in the circumstances defined in section 48 of this Act. 
The receipt of donations that are intended to remain in the Member’s possession is 
inadmissible.  
(3) It is inadmissible to combine a mandate with the remunerated representation of third -
party interests vis -à-vis the Bundestag or the Federal Government or to engage in 
remunerated consultancy activities that are directly connected with the exercise of a 
mandate. This shall not apply to any voluntary activity for which provision has been made for 
a proportionate expenses allowance not exceeding ten per cent of the monthly remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act or to political offices. Agreem ents whereby a Member of 
the Bundestag does not receive considerations or any other pecuniary benefits for having 
represented interests or engaged in consultancy activities within the meaning of the first 
sentence above as a Member of the Bundestag until a fter the loss of his or her membership 
are inadmissible.  
(4) Improper references to membership of the Bundestag in    professional or business
are inadmissible.  
(4) Improper references to membership of the Bundestag in    professional or business 
matters are inadmissible. References to membership of the Bundestag are improper if they 
are liable to create an advantage in professional or business matters by reason of that 
membership of the Bundestag.  
(5) Considerations or pecuniary benefits which are inadmissible under paragraphs 2 to 4 
above or their monetary equivalent shall be payable to the federal budget.  The President 
shall assert this entitlement by means of an administrative act, provided that a period of 
three years has not elapsed since the receipt of the consideration or pecuniary benefit. Loss 
of membership of the Bundestag shall not affect this ent itlement.  
Section 44b  
(repealed)  
Section 44c  
Screening for activity or political responsibilityfor the Ministry of State Security/Office 
ofNational Security of the former German Democratic Republic  
(1) Members of the Bundestag may apply to the President in  writing for screening measures 
to establish whether or not they were full -time employees or unofficial assistants or exercised 
political responsibility for the State Security Service of the former German Democratic 
Republic.  
(2) Screening may take place w ithout consent if the Committee on the Scrutiny of Elections, 
Immunity and the Rules of Procedure has established the existence of concrete grounds for 
suspecting such activity or responsibility.  
(3) In cases referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above, t he procedure shall be conducted 
by the Committee on the Scrutiny of Elections, Immunity and the Rules of Procedure.  
(4) The German Bundestag shall compile guidelines prescribing the procedure for 
establishing whether or not Members were employed by, or exe rcised responsibility for, the
(4) The German Bundestag shall compile guidelines prescribing the procedure for 
establishing whether or not Members were employed by, or exe rcised responsibility for, the 
Ministry of State Security/Office of National Security of the former German Democratic 
Republic.
Section 44d  
Duty of confidentiality and authority to make a statement  
(1) Even after the end of their term of office, Members of  the German Bundestag may not 
testify or make a statement without consent, either in or out of court, in relation to matters 
which are confidential under statutory provisions or under the Rules of Procedure of the 
German Bundestag.  
(2) The President of the  German Bundestag shall be responsible for granting consent. If 
authorities outside the German Bundestag have been involved in originating the matter 
which is to be kept confidential, consent may be granted only with their agreement.  
(3) Consent may only be refused if the testimony or statement would adversely affect the 
welfare of the Federal Republic or a Land  or would seriously jeopardise or substantially 
impair the performance of public duties.  
Section 44e  
Disciplinary measures against Members  
(1) In t he case of a non -minor breach of order or failure to respect the dignity of the 
Bundestag during its sittings, the President may impose a fine of 1,000 euros on a Member 
of the Bundestag. Any repetition shall result in an increase in the fine to 2,000 euro s. In the 
case of a serious breach of order or failure to respect the dignity of the Bundestag, a 
Member may be ordered to leave the Chamber for the remainder of the sitting and 
suspended from taking part in sittings of the Bundestag and meetings of its bo dies for up to 
30 sitting days. Details shall be regulated in the Rules of Procedure of the Bundestag.  
(2) In the case of a non -minor breach of the internal regulations of the Bundestag, the 
President may impose a fine of 1,000 euros on a Member of the Bun destag. Any repetition 
shall result in an increase in the fine to 2,000 euros; a repetition occurs as a rule if the 
Member in question, within six months, has again given cause for the imposition of a fine on 
account of a non -minor breach of the internal r egulations.  
(3) Jurisdiction over disputes regarding measures and decisions taken under subsections (1)
(3) Jurisdiction over disputes regarding measures and decisions taken under subsections (1) 
and (2) above shall lie with the  Federal Constitutional Court.  
PART ELEVEN  
Code of Conduct for Members of the Bundestag  
Section 45  
Obligation to provid e information  
(1) A Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged, in respect of the period prior to his or her 
membership of the Bundestag, to inform the President in writing of  
1. the occupation he or she last practised and the existence of a right to return to 
that occupation after the end of his or her term of office or of protection under section 2(3) 
of this Act against termination of an employment contract;  
2. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory  board or other body of a company or of an enterprise 
operated in another legal form;  
3. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a corporation or institution under 
public law.  
(2) Moreover, a Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged to inform the President in writing 
of the following activities engaged in or taken up, or contracts binding on him or her, during 
membership of the Bundestag:   
1. remunerated activities engaged in a longside the exercise of his or her office, 
either by virtue of being self -employed or by virtue of being a salaried employee. These
include, for example, continuing an occupation engaged in prior to membership of the 
Bundestag, as well as consultancy, rep resentation, the provision of expert opinions, or 
writing or lecturing activities. There shall be no obligation to inform the President of the 
provision of expert opinions or of writing or lecturing activities where the income agreed 
upon does not exceed t he sum of 1,000 euros per month or 3,000 euros per calendar 
year. The same exemption shall apply to activity as a member of the Federal 
Government, as a Parliamentary State Secretary, as a Minister of State, as a Federal 
Government Commissioner or Coordina tor and to parliamentary offices and functions;  
2. activities as member of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a company or of an enterprise 
operated in another legal form;  
3. activities as membe r of a board of management, supervisory board, 
administrative board, advisory board or other body of a corporation or institution under 
public law;  
4. activities as member of a board of management or other managerial or advisory 
body of a club, association  or similar organisation, or of a foundation of not exclusively 
local importance;  
5. the existence or making of agreements whereby the Member of the Bundestag 
is to be assigned certain activities or receive pecuniary benefits during or after 
membership of the Bundestag;  
6. interests held in private corporations ( Kapitalgesellschaften ) or partnerships 
(Personengesellschaften ), if these amount to a share of more than five per cent, unless 
the activity of the partnerships relates exclusively to letting and le asing in connection with 
the management of private property. In the case of interests held in an investment 
company that must be declared pursuant to the first sentence above, the interests of the 
investment company shall also be declared in so far as they  individually exceed five per 
cent.  
For the year of the Bundestag elections, the period of the electoral term coming to an end 
and that of the new electoral term shall be treated separately.  
(3) In respect of activities or contracts for which an obligatio n to provide information under
(3) In respect of activities or contracts for which an obligatio n to provide information under 
subsection (2), points 1 to 5, above exists, the amount of income derived therefrom shall 
also be declared if it exceeds the amount of 1,000 euros within one month or the amount of 
3,000 euros within one calendar year. The gr anting of options for the allocation of company 
shares or of comparable financial instruments as a consideration for the performance of an 
activity shall be deemed equivalent to income. In the case of interests in private corporations 
or partnerships that are to be declared pursuant to section 45(2)(6) of this Act, the amount of 
income from each is also to be indicated. These amounts shall be based on the gross 
amounts due for the activity, including expenses, compensation and benefits in kind. Where 
the in come comprises sales proceeds, the pre -tax profit shall be indicated instead of the 
gross amounts. Where the value cannot be quantified, this shall also be indicated. Expenses 
actually incurred which are reimbursed by the client or employer for the perform ance of the 
activity shall not be regarded as income.  
(4) The obligation to provide information shall not include the notification of facts concerning 
third parties in respect of whom the Member can invoke a statutory right to refuse to give 
evidence or a  duty not to disclose confidential information. In such cases the economic 
sector concerned is to be indicated rather than details of the client concerned. The obligation 
to indicate the economic sector shall not apply if the Member of the Bundestag declar es that 
an indication of the economic sector would reveal the client’s identity.
to indicate the economic sector shall not apply if the Member of the Bundestag declar es that 
an indication of the economic sector would reveal the client’s identity.  
(5) Information provided pursuant to the Code of Conduct must be submitted to the President 
within three months following the acquisition of membership of the German Bundesta g or 
following changes or additions occurring during the electoral term.
Section 46  
Lawyers  
(1) Members of the Bundestag who, for a fee, represent the Federal Republic of Germany in 
court or out of court shall inform the President of this representation if  the fee exceeds the 
amount of 1,000 euros.  
(2) Members of the Bundestag who, for a fee, represent a third party in court or out of court 
against the Federal Republic of Germany shall inform the President of this representation if 
the fee exceeds the amoun t of 1,000 euros. The foregoing shall be without prejudice to 
section 44a(3) of this Act.  
(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , in respect of the 
representation of a party in court or out of court, particularly for or against fede ral corporate 
bodies, institutions or foundations under public law.  
Section 47  
Publication  
The information to which compulsory declaration applies under section 45(1), point 1, and (2) 
to (4) shall be published on the Bundestag website. Where the value of the income declared 
pursuant to section 45(3) is not quantifiable, the published information shall include a 
description of the authorised legal position.   
Section 48  
Gifts of pecuniary value (donations)  
(1) A Member of the Bundestag shall keep separate a ccount of all  kinds of gifts of pecuniary 
value (donations) made available to him or her in connection with a voluntary political 
commitment or with assistance in kind rendered by the donor for the Member’s political 
activities. The foregoing shall be wit hout prejudice to the fifth sentence of section 44a(2) of 
this Act.  
(2) A donation the value of which exceeds 1,000 euros in one calendar year shall be notified 
to the President, with the name and address of the donor and the total amount donated 
being st ated.  
(3) Donations the value of which individually or, in the case of several donations from the 
same donor, taken together, exceeds 3,000 euros in one calendar year shall be published by
same donor, taken together, exceeds 3,000 euros in one calendar year shall be published by 
the President on the website of the German Bundestag together with an indication of the 
amount and origin.  
(4) In respect of donations to a Member of the Bundestag, section 25(2) and (4) of the 
Political Parties Act ( Parteiengesetz ) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) Gifts of pecuniary value received  
1. in connection with  interparliamentary or international activities, or  
2. in connection with participation in events for the purpose of imparting political 
information, presenting the positions of the German Bundestag or of its parliamentary 
groups or representing the Germa n Bundestag  
shall not be deemed to be donations within the meaning of this provision; however, they shall 
be declared in accordance with subsection (2) above and published in accordance with 
subsection (3).  
(6) Gifts of pecuniary value which a Member of t he Bundestag receives as a guest or host in 
connection with his or her mandate shall be notified and handed to the President if the 
material value of the gift exceeds 200 euros. The Member may apply to keep the gift if he or 
she pays the Federal Cash Offic e a sum equivalent to its value.  
(7) The President shall take a decision on the use of declared gifts which Members have 
received as guests as well as of donations unlawfully accepted. These may be auctioned or 
destroyed. If they are auctioned, the proceed s shall be paid into the federal budget.  
(8) Notifications pursuant to this provision shall be made in written or textual form.
Section 49  
Disclosure of interests in committee  
Every Member of the Bundestag in receipt of remuneration for his or her activi ties in 
connection with a subject to be debated in a committee of the Bundestag shall, before 
speaking in the deliberations, disclose as a member of that committee any link between 
these interests and the subject to be debated. Every Member of the Bundesta g who has 
taken over the role of a rapporteur shall declare any specific associated interests prior to the 
deliberations; these declarations shall be noted in the committee’s recommendation for a 
decision.  
Section 50  
Request for further information  
In cas es of doubt the Member of the Bundestag shall be obliged to ascertain, by requesting 
further information from the President, what his or her duties resulting from this Code of 
Conduct are.  
Section 51  
Procedure in the event of contraventions  
(1) If there ar e indications that a Member of the Bundestag has failed to meet his or her 
obligations under section 44(2) to (4) or the Code of Conduct set out in this Part or the rules 
concerning staff employment set out in section 12(3a) of this Act (breach of obligati ons), the 
President may require further information from the Member concerned to explain and clarify 
the situation and may ask the chairperson of the parliamentary group to which the Member 
concerned belongs to state his or her position.  
(2) If, having exa mined the facts, the President believes that the case in question constitutes 
a less serious case, or a case of minor negligence (e.g. exceeding the time limit for declaring 
information by no more than three months), the Member concerned shall receive an 
admonishment. Where this is not the case, the President shall inform the Presidium and the 
chairpersons of the parliamentary groups of the result of the investigation. Having heard the 
Member concerned, the Presidium shall then state whether a breach of obl igations has taken 
place. A statement by the Presidium that a Member of the Bundestag has failed to meet his
place. A statement by the Presidium that a Member of the Bundestag has failed to meet his 
or her obligations shall, notwithstanding further sanctions under section 12(3a) and section 
44a of this Act, be published as a printed paper. A st atement that no breach of obligations 
has been committed shall be published at the request of the Member of the Bundestag.   
(3) If there are indications of a breach of obligations on the part of a member of the 
Presidium or the chairperson of a parliament ary group, the Member of the Bundestag 
concerned shall not attend meetings in the framework of these proceedings. In place of the 
chairperson of the parliamentary group concerned, his or her deputy shall be heard in 
accordance with subsection (1) above and  informed in accordance with subsection (2). If 
there are indications that the President has failed to meet his or her obligations, his or her 
deputy shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of subsections (1) and (2).  
(4) If activities, income or c orporate shares that are subject to reporting obligations are not 
declared or if the obligations under section 44a(2) to (4) or the first sentence of section 
12(3a) of this Act are breached, after hearing once again the Member who has failed to meet 
his or  her reporting obligations, the Presidium may impose a fine. The level of the fine shall 
depend on the gravity of the case in question and the degree of fault. It may amount to up to 
half of the annual Members’ remuneration. The President shall implement t he decision of the 
Presidium. The President shall validate the fine by means of an administrative act. At the 
request of the Member in question, payment of the fine in instalments may be agreed. The 
third and fourth sentences of section 31 of this Act shal l apply, mutatis mutandis .
request of the Member in question, payment of the fine in instalments may be agreed. The 
third and fourth sentences of section 31 of this Act shal l apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(5) In cases covered by section 12(3a) and section 44a(5) of this Act, the President shall, 
after hearing the Member concerned, set in motion a factual and legal investigation. The 
examination of whether an appropriate service ha s been rendered in return within the
meaning of the third sentence of section 44a(2) of this Act shall be based on the levels of 
remuneration which could typically be expected; otherwise the determinant factor shall be 
whether the benefits received and the  service provided are obviously out of proportion. 
Measures under this subsection can only be taken within three years of receipt of the gift or 
pecuniary benefits. The President may ask the Member to provide additional information to 
explain and clarify t he facts of the case and ask the chairperson of the parliamentary group 
to which the Member belongs to state his or her position. If the President believes that an 
inadmissible gift as defined by section 44a(2) to (4) or a case regulated by section 12(3a) is 
indicated, he or she shall inform the Presidium and the chairpersons of the parliamentary 
groups of the result of the investigation. After hearing the Member concerned, the Presidium 
shall ascertain whether an infringement of section 44a(2) to (4) or of  the staff employment 
rules has taken place. The President shall validate the entitlements under section 12(3a) and 
the entitlement under section 44a(5) by means of an administrative act. Notwithstanding 
further sanctions under section 12(3a) and section 4 4a, the statement indicating that a 
Member of the Bundestag has infringed his or her duties under this Act shall be published as 
a printed paper. The statement that an infringement has not taken place may be published at 
the request of the Member of the Bu ndestag. Subsection (3) above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis . 
(6) At the start of an electoral term, the President shall present to the Bundestag a report 
containing data on the number of initiated investigation procedures as well as their 
culmination in th e abandonment of proceedings, admonishment, identified breaches of 
obligations and validated penalties and the amount paid to the federal budget under section 
44a(5) of this Act.  
Section 52  
Implementing provisions  
The Council of Elders shall enact implemen ting provisions concerning the content and scope 
of the obligations laid down in Parts Ten and Eleven of this Act.  
Section 52a
of the obligations laid down in Parts Ten and Eleven of this Act.  
Section 52a  
Transitional arrangements  
Shares which were already held when this Act entered into force and which were not subject 
to compulso ry declaration under the previous law shall become subject to compulsory 
declaration for the first time under section 45(2)(6) and the third sentence of section 45(3) of 
this Act twelve months after its entry into force.     
PART TWELVE  
Parliamentary group s 
Section 53  
Creation of a parliamentary group  
(1) Members of the Bundestag may form themselves into parliamentary groups.  
(2) Further details are provided by the Rules of Procedure of the German Bundestag.  
Section 54  
Legal status  
(1) The parliamentary gro ups are associations of Members of the German Bundestag with 
legal capacity.  
(2) The parliamentary groups may sue and be sued.  
(3) The parliamentary groups do not form part of the public administration; they do not 
exercise governmental authority.  
Section 55 
Duties
(1) The parliamentary groups shall assist in the performance of the duties of the German 
Bundestag.  
(2) The parliamentary groups may work together with parliamentary groups or parties in 
other parliaments and with parliamentary institutions both nationally and internationally.  
(3) The parliamentary groups and their members may inform the public of their activities.  
Section 56  
Organisation  
(1) The parliamentary groups are under an obligation to arrange their organisational 
structure and working met hods in accordance with the principles of parliamentary democracy 
and to align them with the said principles.  
(2) The parliamentary groups shall enact their own Rules of Procedure.  
Section 57  
Duty of confidentiality of employees of the parliamentary groups  
(1) Even after the termination of their employment contracts, employees of the parliamentary 
groups shall be duty -bound to treat as confidential all matters which have become known to 
them during the course of their work. This does not apply to facts whic h are obvious or 
whose significance does not merit confidentiality.   
(2) Even after the termination of their employment contracts, employees of the parliamentary 
groups may not testify or make a statement on such matters without consent, either in or out 
of court. The chairperson of the relevant parliamentary group shall be responsible for 
granting consent.  
(3) The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply without prejudice to the 
statutory duty to report crimes and to uphold the basic princi ples of democracy in the event 
of their being endangered.  
Section 58  
Monetary benefits and benefits in kind  
(1) For the purpose of performing their duties, the parliamentary groups shall be entitled to 
monetary benefits and benefits in kind from the federa l budget.  
(2) The monetary benefits shall comprise a basic grant for each parliamentary group, an 
amount for each Member and an additional sum for each group which is not in government 
(Opposition supplement). The amount of these grants and of the Opposit ion supplement 
shall be determined annually by the Bundestag. In consultation with the Council of Elders, 
the President shall draft a report for presentation to the Bundestag by 30 September each
the President shall draft a report for presentation to the Bundestag by 30 September each 
year, relating to the reasonableness of the grants and of th e Opposition supplement and 
shall at the same time submit adjustment proposals.  
(3) The benefits in kind shall be provided for use, in accordance with the Budget Act 
(Haushaltsgesetz ). 
(4) Benefits provided under subsection (1) above may only be used by th e parliamentary 
groups for duties incumbent upon them by virtue of the Basic Law ( Grundgesetz ), the 
present Act and the Rules of Procedure ( Geschäftsordnung ) of the German Bundestag. The 
use of these benefits for party -political purposes is not permitted.  
(5) Monetary benefits payable under subsection (1) above may be carried forward to the next 
accounting period.  
Section 59  
Budgetary and economic management; bookkeeping  
(1) Details of budgetary and economic management shall be prescribed in implementing 
provisions issued by the Council of Elders after consultation with the Federal Audit Office 
(Bundesrechnungshof ).
(2) The parliamentary groups must keep accounts showing the income, expenditure and 
assets they are required to record. These shall be kept in accordance with the principles of 
orderly accounting and with regard for the purpose of this Act.  
(3) Items purchased from the monetary benefits under section 58(1), except items  intended 
for use in the short term and inexpensive items, must be identifie d and listed in a supporting 
document.  
(4) The accounts must be stored for five years.  
Section 60  
Rendering of accounts  
(1) The parliamentary groups shall be publicly accountable for the origin and use of the 
resources accruing to them under section 58(1) of this Act in each calendar year (accounting 
year).  
(2) The account shall be set out as follows:  
1. Income  
(a) Monetary benefits received pursuant to section 58(1) of this Act  
(b) Other income  
2. Expenditure  
(a) Total payments to group members for perform ing special functions within the 
group  
(b) Total personnel expenditure on group staff  
(c) Expenditure on events  
(d) Experts’ fees, court costs and similar expenditure  
(e) Expenditure on collaboration with parliamentary groups and parties in other 
parliamen ts 
(f) Expenditure on public -relations activities  
(g) Expenditure on routine business activities  
(h) Investment expenditure  
(i) Other expenditure.  
(3) The accounts must identify the assets acquired using funds received under section 58(1) 
and the reserves formed from these funds as well as debts and liabilities. The asset and 
liability statement shall be set out as follows:  
1. Assets  
(a) Monetary holdings  
(b) Other assets  
(c) Accruals and deferrals  
2. Liabilities  
(a) Reserves  
(b) Provisions  
(c) Liabilities to financial institutions
(d) Other liabilities  
(e) Accruals and deferrals.  
(4) The statement must be examined by an auditor (chartered accountant or chartered 
accountancy firm) appointed in consultation with the Federal Audit Office, to ensure that it 
complies with subsections (2) and (3) above, and it must bear an auditor’s endorsement to 
that effect. The audited statement shall be submitted to the President of the German 
Bundestag no later than six months after the end of the calendar year or month in wh ich the 
monetary benefits referred to in section 58(1) of this Act were last paid. The President of the 
German Bundestag may extend the deadline by up to three months for exceptional reasons. 
The audited statement shall be distributed as a Bundestag printe d paper.  
(5) For as long as a parliamentary group defaults on submission of the statement, the 
monetary benefits and benefits in kind payable under section 58(1) shall be withheld.  
Section 61  
Auditing of accounts  
(1) The Federal Audit Office shall audit the accounts as well as the monetary benefits and 
benefits in kind with which the parliamentary groups have been provided under section 58(1) 
of this Act in order to ensure that they have been used economically and properly in 
accordance with the implement ing provisions issued under section 59(1).  
(2) During the audit, due consideration shall be given to the legal status and duties of the 
parliamentary groups. The political necessity of any measure carried out by the groups shall 
not form part of the audit.  
Section 62  
Termination of legal status and liquidation  
(1) The legal status conferred by section 54 of this Act shall cease to apply  
1. on the loss of parliamentary -group status,  
2. on the dissolution of the parliamentary group,  
3. at the end of the elect oral term.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1)(1) and (2) above, liquidation shall take place. 
The parliamentary group shall be regarded as continuing in existence until the liquidation has
The parliamentary group shall be regarded as continuing in existence until the liquidation has 
come to an end if the purpose of the liquidation so req uires. The liquidation shall be effected 
by the executive committee unless otherwise provided by the rules of procedure of the 
parliamentary group.  
(3) The liquidators must complete all unfinished business transactions, collect debts and 
satisfy creditors . For this purpose, they shall be entitled to enter into new transactions and 
convert assets into cash. They shall comply with the provisions of section 58(4) regarding 
the purposes for which benefits may be used. If, during the liquidation process, the 
liquidators are guilty of negligence, they shall be jointly and severally liable to the creditors 
for the damages arising therefrom.  
(4) Where monetary benefits provided under section 58(1) of this Act remain after completion 
of the liquidation, these must b e repaid into the federal budget. The same shall apply to 
assets purchased with these benefits. The benefits in kind provided in accordance with 
section 58(3) must be returned to the providing units.  
(5) The remaining assets of the parliamentary group must  be left to the beneficiaries. The 
beneficiaries are the persons or authorities specified in the rules of procedure of the 
parliamentary group.  
(6) Measures under subsections (4) and (5) above may not be taken until six months have 
elapsed since the event  giving rise to loss of the legal status conferred by section 54 of the 
present Act. The provision of security for creditors must be effected in accordance with 
section 52 of the Civil Code ( Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch ).
(7) In the case referred to in subsect ion (1)(3) above, a liquidation shall not take place if, 
within thirty days from the start of the new electoral term, a parliamentary group is formed 
whose members belong to a party represented by a parliamentary group in the German 
Bundestag during the pr evious electoral term and which declares itself to be the successor 
to the latter group. In this case, the newly constituted parliamentary group shall be the 
successor in title to the old parliamentary group.  
Annex I  
Parts Five and Nine of the Members of t he Bundestag Act as applicable until 22 
December 1995  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 18  
Transitional emoluments  
(1) An outgoing Member with at least one year of membership shall receive transit ional 
emoluments. The transitional emoluments, amounting to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1) of this Act, shall be paid for one month for each year of 
membership; where the Member has belonged to the Bundestag for longer than half of an  
electoral term, transitional emoluments shall be awarded for a further period of three months; 
where his or her membership lasted for less than half of an electoral term, transitional 
emoluments shall be paid for only two more months,  up to a maximum of three years. 
Periods of earlier membership of the Bundestag for which transitional emoluments have 
already been paid are not reckonable. Membership of the Bundestag lasting more than half a 
year shall be regarded as a full year for the purposes of the calc ulation described in the 
second sentence above.  
(2) Benefits deriving from membership of the European Parliament, the Parliament of a 
constituent state of the Federal Republic of Germany ( Land ) or the tenure of office from 
employment in the public service  or from a supplementary retirement and surviving 
dependants’ pension for public servants shall be reckonable. The same shall apply to 
benefits from the tenure of office or employment in the public service with an
benefits from the tenure of office or employment in the public service with an 
intergovernmental or international institu tion. Section 29(7) and (9) of this Act shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis .  
(3) On request, the transitional emoluments referred to in subsection (1) above may be paid 
as a single gratuity or monthly at half the prescribed amount for double the prescribed 
period. The third sentence of subsection (1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis .   
(4) If the former Member re -enters the Bundestag, his or her entitlement to monthly 
payments under subsection (1) above shall be suspended. If the former Member has 
received the tran sitional emoluments in the form of a gratuity, he or she shall repay the 
amount that would have accrued after the date of re -entry if he or she had been receiving 
monthly payments. The President shall determine the instalments in which this amount is to 
be repaid.  
(5) If a former Member dies, the benefits referred to in subsection (1) above shall continue to 
be paid to the surviving spouse or to the former Member’s natural and adopted children or 
shall be left to them if no pension rights have accrued under  this Act.  
(6) A former Member who belongs to the European Parliament may only claim his or her 
transitional emoluments after severance from the European Parliament.  
(7) Subsection (1) above shall not apply if the Member loses his or her membership of the 
Bundestag on the basis of section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Act. The President of the 
Bundestag may suspend payments if there are likely to be proceedings which give rise to the 
consequences described in section 15(2)(2) of the Federal Electoral Ac t. 
Section 19  
Entitlement to receive superannuation benefits
After leaving the Bundestag, a Member shall receive superannuation benefits when he or 
she reaches his or her sixty -fifth birthday, provided that he or she belonged to the Bundestag 
for eight yea rs. With each additional year of membership of the Bundestag, up to and 
including the eighteenth year, the right to receive superannuation benefits shall accrue one 
year earlier. The last sentence of section 18(1) of this Act shall apply, mutatis mutandis . A 
period of four years shall be credited for each electoral term lasting more than two years.  
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits in respect of eight years’ membership shall amount to thirty -five per 
cent of the Members’ r emuneration payable under section 11(1) of this Act. For each 
additional year of membership up to and including the eighteenth year, it shall be increased 
by four per cent. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall 
form the basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two 
sentences above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1). The last sentence of section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandi s.  
Section 21  
Reckonability of periods in the Parliament of a Land  
(1) On application, periods of service in the Parliament of a constituent state ( Land ) of the 
Federal Republic of Germany shall be regarded as periods of membership within the 
meaning of s ection 19 of this Act. If the conditions for entitlement under this Act are thereby 
fulfilled, superannuation benefits shall be paid.  
(2) The amount of superannuation benefits shall be one eighth of the minimum amount of 
superannuation benefits specified i n the first sentence of section 20 for  each year of actual 
membership of the Bundestag. The third and fourth sentences of section 20 shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis . 
Section 22  
Damage to health  
(1) If a Member suffered damage to his or her health when servi ng in the Bundestag, except
(1) If a Member suffered damage to his or her health when servi ng in the Bundestag, except 
through his or her own gross negligence, and if the Member’s ability to work is thereby 
permanently and seriously impaired to the extent that he or she can no longer fulfil his or her 
mandate or, on leaving the Bundestag, return  to the occupation which he or she had before 
election to the Bundestag or engage in any other reasonable occupation, he or she shall, on 
application and irrespective of the conditions set out in section 19 of this Act, receive 
superannuation benefits with  effect from the month in which the application is made; the 
amount of these benefits shall be calculated in accordance with section 20 but shall be no 
less than thirty -five per cent of the remuneration payable under section 11(1). If the damage 
to the Mem ber’s health is the result of an accident, the assessment basis described in 
section 20 shall be increased by twenty per cent up to a maximum of seventy -five per cent.  
(2) If a former Member of the Bundestag who, irrespective of age, fulfils the conditions  under 
section 19 of this Act with regard to length of service suffers damage to health within the 
meaning of subsection (1) above, he or she shall receive superannuation benefits, the 
amount of which shall be determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The damage to health must be substantiated by a report from a medical institution 
governed by public law. This report shall be superseded by a notice of award in respect of a 
pension for occupational disability or incapacity for employment or by a notice of invalidity as 
defined in civil -service law.  
Section 23  
Compensatory severance payment
(1) A Member who, on leaving the Bundestag, has acquired neither expectancy rights nor 
entitlement to superannuation benefits under sections 19 to 22 of this Act shal l, on 
application, receive a compensatory severance payment for the period of his or her 
membership of the Bundestag. It shall be paid in respect of each month of membership of 
the Bundestag commenced and shall be equal in amount to the maximum contributio n to the 
salaried employees’ pension scheme in each of the months in question plus twenty per cent 
of the said maximum contribution.  
(2) Instead of the severance payment, Members who fulfil the conditions defined in 
subsection (1) above may also apply to b uy in the period of their membership of the 
Bundestag in implementation, mutatis mutandis , of the provisions of the Sixth Book of the 
German Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch ) relating to retroactive insurance.  
(3) Subsection (2) above shall apply, mutatis mut andis , to supplementary retirement and 
surviving dependants’ pensions.  
(4) Subsection (2) shall not apply if and in so far as the period of membership of the 
Bundestag has been accounted for or will be accounted for under an insurance scheme 
governed by p ublic law or in a pension awarded on the basis of service regulations.  
(5) Instead of the severance payment referred to in subsection (1) above, the period of 
membership of the Bundestag may, on application, be counted as a period of reckonable 
service wit hin the meaning of the legislation governing the pay and pensions of civil 
servants, judges and members of the armed forces.  
(6) If a Member has made an application under subsections (1) to (3) or subsection (5) 
above, the accumulation of the qualifying pe riods of membership specified in section 19 of 
this Act shall be resumed in the event of his or her re -entering the Bundestag.  
(7) Subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to an outgoing Member of
(7) Subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to an outgoing Member of 
the Parliament of a Land  if the legisla tion of the Land  provides for a compensatory 
severance payment within the meaning of subsection (1) above.  
(8) If a Member of a Land  Parliament loses his or her membership but has no entitlement or 
expectancy rights to a lump -sum payment or regular pension  benefits in respect of his or her 
membership of Parliament, subsections (2) and (4) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Section 24  
Transitional allowance for surviving dependants  
(1) The surviving dependants of a Member of the Bundestag shall receive th e payments 
provided for by this Act but not yet disbursed, on condition that they were due at the time of 
death. The surviving spouse and the offspring shall receive a transitional allowance equal to 
the amount of Members’ remuneration payable under sectio n 11(1) of this Act. The 
transitional allowance shall amount to one and a half times the Members’ remuneration 
payable under section 11(1) in cases where the deceased was a Member for more than 
eight years or more than two electoral terms. The President sh all determine who is to receive 
the payments. If there are no surviving dependants within the meaning of the second 
sentence above, the transitional allowance shall be granted to other persons who bore the 
costs arising from the final illness or the funera l costs, up to the amount of the expenditure 
they incurred.  
(2) The same shall apply in the event of the death of a former Member of the Bundestag who 
fulfils the conditions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act and was 
not yet re ceiving superannuation benefits at the time of death.  
Section 25  
Surviving dependants’ pension  
(1) The surviving spouse of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag shall receive sixty 
per cent of the appropriate superannuation benefits, provided the dec eased was entitled to
(1) The surviving spouse of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag shall receive sixty 
per cent of the appropriate superannuation benefits, provided the dec eased was entitled to 
superannuation benefits at the time of death or fulfilled the conditions for the award of 
superannuation benefits.
(2) The surviving spouse of a Member or former Member of the Bundestag, who, irrespective 
of age, fulfilled the condit ions relating to duration of membership under section 19 of this Act 
shall receive sixty per cent of the superannuation benefits, the amount of which shall be 
determined in accordance with section 20.  
(3) The natural and adopted children of a former Member  who would have received 
superannuation benefits at the time of his or her death, or of a deceased Member or a 
deceased recipient of superannuation benefits, shall each receive an orphan’s pension. If the 
children are orphans, the pension shall amount to t wenty per cent of the superannuation 
benefits referred to in subsections (1) and (2) above; if they still have one parent, the 
children shall receive an orphan’s pension amounting to twelve per cent of the said benefits.  
(4) In the event of the death of a  Member of the Bundestag who has belonged to the 
Bundestag for less than twelve years, the surviving spouse shall receive sixty per cent, each 
orphan twenty per cent and each child with one surviving parent twelve per cent of the 
superannuation benefits pa yable to a Member with eleven years’ reckonable service.  
Section 25a  
Pension -rights adjustment  
(1) The superannuation benefits receivable for the reckonable duration of the Member’s 
cumulative mandates until the point at which a petition for divorce become s pending (total 
period) shall be used to determine the difference in value within the meaning of section 
1587a(2) of the Civil Code for the purpose of pension -rights adjustment. The applicable 
value of the pension shall be that part of the superannuation benefits which corresponds to 
the duration of the cumulative mandates falling within the period of the marriage expressed 
as a percentage of the total period. The pension awarded under this Act shall be regarded as 
flexible.  
(2) If, when the petition for d ivorce becomes pending, no right to receive superannuation 
benefits has accrued, the relevant percentage of the minimum superannuation benefits must
benefits has accrued, the relevant percentage of the minimum superannuation benefits must 
be taken into account for each year of membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shal l apply, mutatis mutandis , to the pension payable 
under the acts concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of the Länder .  
Section 26  
Application of civil -service regulations  
Without prejudice to any contrary provision contained in this Act, the  provisions of  pensions 
legislation relating to federal civil servants shall be applied, mutatis mutandis . Section 53(5) 
of the Civil Service Benefits Act ( Beamtenversorgungsgesetz ), in the version promulgated on 
24 October 1990 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  2298), as amended by the Act of 20 September 
1994 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2442) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to the concept of 
employment in the public service within the meaning of the present section.  
PART NINE  
Transitional provisions  
Section 35  
Transitional provisions in respect of the Eleventh Act Amending the Act on the Legal 
Status of Members of the Bundestag  
(1) The present Act shall apply without prejudice to pension entitlements and expectancy 
rights predating the entry into force of the Elev enth Amendment Act. Section 29(4) of the 
present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , 
to surviving dependants of a recipient of superannuation benefits if the latter dies after the 
entry into force of the Ele venth Amendment Act.  
(2) Pension entitlements and expectancy rights of former Members of the Bundestag who 
fulfil the conditions relating to duration of membership prior to the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act and those of their surviving de pendants shall be governed by the
law hitherto in force, provided that the insured event occurs prior to 1 January 2002. Section 
29(4) of the present Act shall apply. The first and second sentences above shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis , to Members of the Bun destag who belong to the Bundestag or to the 
Parliament of a Land  prior to the entry into force of the Eleventh Amendment Act as well as 
to their surviving dependants.  
(3) Former Members of the Bundestag who re -enter the Bundestag after the entry into forc e 
of the Eleventh Amendment Act and who fulfil the conditions set out in sections 19 and 21 of 
the present Act prior to the amendment shall receive superannuation benefits under the law 
hitherto in force, subject to the proviso that four per cent of the re muneration referred to in 
section 11(1) shall be awarded for each year of membership after the entry into force of the 
Eleventh Amendment Act until the maximum rate of superannuation benefits is reached. 
Section 29(4) shall apply. The first and second sent ences above shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis , to surviving dependants.  
(4) The pension expectancy arising under subsections (1) to (3) of the law hitherto in force 
shall form the basis of assessment for the pension entitlement if it is higher than the pension  
expectancy arising under this Act.  
 
Section 36  
Transitional provisions for public servants  
(1) A civil servant who has retired on the basis of the Act of 11 May 1951 on the Legal Status 
of Public Servants Elected to the First German Bundestag ( Gesetz über  die Rechtsstellung 
der in den ersten Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - 
Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297) or on the basis of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal 
Status of Public Servants Elected to the German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung
Status of Public Servants Elected to the German Bundestag ( Gesetz über die Rechtsstellung 
der in den Deutschen Bundestag gewählten Angehörigen des öffentlichen Dienstes  - Federal 
Law Gazette I, p. 777), as amended by the Act of 21 August 1961 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 
1557) or on the basis of corresponding legisla tion of a Land  and who was elected to the 
eighth Bundestag or to a later Bundestag, shall be regarded as having been re -appointed as 
a civil servant on simultaneous suspension of his or her rights and duties (section 5(1) of the 
present Act) with effect fr om the date of acceptance of election or from the date of entry into 
force of the present Act, whichever is the later, provided that he or she still fulfils the general 
conditions for appointment as a civil servant. In all other respects, the entitlements accruing, 
prior to the entry into force of the present Act, under section 4 and the last sentence of 
section 4a of the Act of 4 August 1953 on the Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the 
German Bundestag shall be preserved.  
(2) Subsection (1) above shall apply , mutatis mutandis , to judges, to career members and 
fixed-term volunteer members of the armed forces and to public -service employees.  
(3) In the case of former Members of the Bundestag, entitlements accruing under the Act of 
4 August 1953 on t he Legal Status of Public Servants elected to the German Bundestag 
shall be preserved.  
Section 37  
Pensions for Members who retired prior to 1968  
On application, the President shall award superannuation benefits and a surviving 
dependants’ pension, pursuant  to the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), dated 3 May 1968 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 334), as 
amended by Article VIII of the Act of 18 February 1977 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297), to a
amended by Article VIII of the Act of 18 February 1977 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 297), to a 
former Member who  retired from the Bundestag prior to 1 January 1968 and to his or her 
surviving dependants with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 38  
Pensions for periods prior to the entry into force of this Act
(1) A Member of the Bundestag w ho leaves during the period between 1 January 1968 and 
the date of entry into force of the present Act and his or her surviving dependants shall 
receive a pension under the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 
1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ). 
(2) A Member of the Bundestag who belonged to the Bundestag prior to the date of entry into 
force of this Act and did not leave the Bundestag until after that date shall receive 
superannuation benefits in accordance with this Act; his or her membership p rior to the entry 
into force of this Act shall be reckonable service for the assessment of these benefits.  
(3) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, the 
individual’s own contributions to superannuation benefits and th e surviving dependants’ 
pension under section 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application without payment of interest. In the latter 
case, periods of membership of the Bundestag prior to the e ntry into force of the present Act 
shall not be taken into consideration in the determination of the superannuation benefits 
payable under this Act. In the cases described in section 23 of this Act, only half of the 
compensatory severance payment shall be awarded.  
(4) Instead of the superannuation benefits awardable under subsection (2) above, a Member 
of the Bundestag who fulfils the conditions of section 5(1) and section 7a(1) of the Act 
governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 shall r eceive, on 
application, a retirement pension under the said Act for the period of membership of the 
Bundestag prior to the entry into force of the present Act; for the period after the entry into 
force of the present Act came into force, superannuation ben efits under this Act shall be 
awarded, subject to the proviso that five per cent of the Members’ remuneration under 
section 11(1) is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after
section 11(1) is paid for each year of membership. The qualifying periods before and after 
the entry into force of this Act may not exceed s ixteen years. The same shall apply in respect 
of surviving dependants.  
(5) The application referred to in subsections (3) and (4) above must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the entry into force of this Act.  
Section 38a  
(1) On application, recipients of pensions awarded under sections 37 and 38(1) of this Act 
shall receive a pension in accordance with Part Five instead of their current pension. The 
same applies to former Members who belonged to the Bundestag for at least six years 
before the entry into force of this Act and their surviving dependants. The last sentence of 
section 18(1) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . 
(2) Section 38(4) shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to former Members who left the Bundestag 
prior to 1 April 1977 and subsequently re -entered. The application must be made to the 
President of the Bundestag within six months from the date of re -entry into the German 
Bundestag. The same shall apply in respect of surviving dependants.  
Section 38b  
Surviving dependants’ pe nsion in the event of the death of a serving Member of the 
Bundestag  
On application, surviving dependants as defined in section 25(4) of the present Act whose 
insured event occurred during the period between 1 April 1977 and the date of entry into 
force of  the Seventh Amendment Act shall receive a pension under section 25(4) of the 
present Act with effect from the first day of the month of application.  
Section 39  
Reckonability of previous pension benefits  
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governi ng the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be
(1) In accordance with section 10 of the Act governi ng the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ), pension benefits payable under that Act shall not be 
reckonable benefits for the purposes of section 29(3) and (4) of the present Act.
(2) Where there is a concurrent entitlement to remuneration or a pension arising from 
membership of the Parliament of a Land  (section 29(5) and (6) of the present Act), only the 
non-contributory element of pension benefits payable under the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 196 8 shall be reckonable. Periods credited 
under section 21 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 
shall be regarded as contribution periods.  
Section 40  
Reduced compensatory severance payment  
For periods of membership to which the Act governing the Remuneration of Members of the 
Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) applies, half of the compensatory severance payment 
under section 23 of the present Act shall be awarded. In this case, the Member’s own 
insurance contributions under s ection 4 of the Act governing the Remuneration of Members 
of the Bundestag 1968 shall be reimbursed on application.  
Section 41  
Continuation of life assurance  
Life-assurance policies in existence on the entry into force of this Act shall be continued, 
subje ct to reduction of superannuation benefits and widow’s or widower’s pension in 
accordance with the number and amount of monthly contributions made by the policyholder 
to the life -assurance fund since 1 January 1968.  
Section 42  
Conversion or cancellation of  life assurance  
(1) A Member or former Member of the Bundestag who has opted for the continuation of 
insurance at the expense of the Federal Republic under section 20 of the Act governing the 
Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) may convert or 
cancel the life -assurance policy.  
(2) In the case of conversion, there is the option of continuation at the individual’s own 
expense or of non -contributory insurance, subject to reduction of superannuation benefits 
and widow’s or widower’s  pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly
and widow’s or widower’s  pension in accordance with the number and amount of monthly 
contributions made by the policyholder to the life -assurance fund from 1 January 1968 until 
the end of the month in which the policy was converted or until the award of superannuation 
benefits.  
(3) In the event of cancellation of the insurance policy, the insured person shall be 
reimbursed with the redemption value based on his or her own contributions.  
Section 43  
Continued payment of transitional emoluments  
A former Member of the Bundestag receiv ing Members’ allowances under the Act governing 
the Remuneration of Members of the Bundestag 1968 ( Diätengesetz 1968 ) at the time of 
entry into force of the present Act shall retain this entitlement.  
Section 44  
Reckonable service for transitional emolument s 
Periods of Membership of the Bundestag prior to the entry into force of this Act shall count 
towards the period for which transitional emoluments are payable.  
Annex II  
Provisions of Part Five of the Members of the Bundestag Act as applicable until 31 
December 2007  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants
Section 20  
Amount of superannuation benefits  
Superannuation benefits shall be calculated on the basis of Members’ monthly remuneration 
(section 11(1) of this A ct). The rate of increase shall be three per cent of the Members’ 
remuneration specified in section 11(1) for each year of membership up to and including the 
twenty -third year. Time spent in office as President and/or one of his or her deputies shall 
form the basis for the calculation of superannuation benefits pursuant to the first two 
sentences above, the supplementary allowance being added to the Members’ remuneration 
specified in section 11(1). The fourth sentence of section 18(1) and the fourth sentenc e of 
section 19 shall apply, mutatis mutandis .  
Annex III  
Provisions of Part Five of the Members of the Bundestag Act as applicable until  31 
August 2009  
PART FIVE  
Benefits for former Members of the Bundestag and their surviving dependants  
Section 25a  
Pensi on-rights adjustment  
(1) The superannuation benefits receivable for the reckonable duration of the Member’s 
cumulative mandates until the point at which a petition for divorce becomes pending (total 
period) shall be used to determine the difference in valu e within the meaning of section 
1587a(2) of the Civil Code for the purpose of pension -rights adjustment. The applicable 
value of the pension shall be that part of the superannuation benefits which corresponds to 
the duration of the cumulative mandates fall ing within the period of the marriage expressed 
as a percentage of the total period. The pension awarded under this Act shall be regarded as 
flexible.  
(2) If, when the petition for divorce becomes pending, no right to receive superannuation 
benefits has ac crued, the relevant percentage of the minimum superannuation benefits must 
be taken into account for each year of membership of the Bundestag.  
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to the pension payable
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) above shall apply, mutatis mutandis , to the pension payable 
under the acts concernin g the legal status of Members of Parliament of the Länder . The 
application of subsection (2) shall be subject to the proviso that, in cases where the act 
concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of a Land  requires a minimum period 
of membership  for entitlement to superannuation benefits and this qualifying period has not 
yet been completed, either the appropriate percentage of the minimum pension or, where the 
act concerning the legal status of Members of Parliament of a Land  so provides, the re levant 
rate of increase under Land  law must be taken into account for each year of membership o f 
the Parliament of the Land .
Act on Adoption Placement and Support and on the 
Prohibition of Surrogacy Placement  
(Adoptionsvermittlungsgesetz – AdVermiG)  
Adoption Placement Act as published on 21 June 2021 (Federal Law Ga zette I, p. 2010)  
 
Part 1  
Adoption placement and support  
Section 1  
Adoption placement  
'Adoption placement' means the matching of children under the age of 18 years with persons 
wishing to adopt a child (adoption applicants) with a view to adoption. It also  means the 
furnishing of proof of the opportunity to adopt a child or have a child adopted, including in 
cases where the child has not yet been born or conceived. Surrogacy placement does not 
constitute adoption placement.  
Section 2  
Adoption placement agen cies 
(1) Adoption placement is the task of the Youth Welfare Office and of the Land  Youth 
Welfare Office. A Youth Welfare Office may only carry out adoption placement if it has 
established an adoption placement agency; the Land  Youth Welfare Office is requ ired to 
establish a central adoption agency.  
(2) Youth Welfare Offices in neighbouring municipalities or counties may, with the consent of 
the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency, together establish a joint adoption 
placement agency. Land  Youth Welfare Offices may together form a joint central adoption 
agency. In Berlin, Hamburg and Saarland, the tasks of the Youth Welfare Offices’ adoption 
placement agencies may be transferred to the respective Land  Youth Welfare Offices.  
(3) The following local and central bodies are also authorised to carry out adoption 
placement in Germany:  
1. Diakonie Deutsch land (the social welfare organisation of Germany’s Protestant 
churches),  
2. the German Caritas Association (the representative of the Catholic welfa re 
association in Germany),
3. Arbeiterwohlfahrt (the Workers’ Welfare Association),  
4. those professional associations which are affiliated to the organisations referred 
to in nos. 1 to 3, and  
5. other organisations based in Germany.  
The agencies referred  to in sentence 1 must be accredited as an adoption placement agency 
by the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency.  
(4) As part of its placement activities and the support to be provided in accordance with 
section 9, the Youth Welfare Offices’  adoption placement agencies and the Land  Youth 
Welfare Offices’ central adoption agencies cooperate in a spirit of partnership with the 
adoption placement agencies referred to in subsection (3) and section 2a (4) no. 2.  
(5) Adoption placement agencies (se ction 2 (1) and (3), section 2a (4)) cooperate in an 
interdisciplinary manner with other specialist services and facilities.  
Section 2a  
Intercountry adoption procedure; principle of placement  
(1) 'Intercountry adoption procedure' means an adoption procedur e in which a child 
habitually resident abroad was, is or is to be brought to Germany, either following adoption in 
his or her home country by adopters habitually resident in Germany or with a view to 
adoption in Germany or the child’s home country. Sentenc e 1 also applies where the 
adopters are habitually resident in Germany and the child was brought to Germany within 
two years before the filing of an application for adoption in Germany or the child’s home 
country. Sentences 1 and 2 apply accordingly where a child habitually resident in Germany 
was, is or is to be taken abroad by adopters habitually resident abroad.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) sentence 1 and 2, the placement must be 
mediated by an adoption placement agency as referred to i n subsection (4), in the cases 
referred to in subsection (1) sentence 3 by an adoption placement agency as referred to in 
subsection (4) no. 1.  
(3) Within the area of application of the Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of
(3) Within the area of application of the Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of 
Children and Co -opera tion in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (Federal Law Gazette 2001 
II, p. 1034) (Adoption Convention), the provisions of the Adoption Convention 
Implementation Act of 5 November 2001 ( Adoptionsübereinkommens -Ausführungsgesetz , 
AdÜbAG; Federal Law Gazette I , p. 2950), as amended, also apply.  
(4) The following are authorised to carry out intercountry adoption placement:  
1. the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency,  
2. an accredited foreign placement agency pursuant to section 4 (2) within the 
bounds of the licence granted to it.  
(5) The agencies referred to in subsection (4) cooperate with the Federal Office of Justice in 
its capacity as the Federal Central Agency for Foreign Adoption (Federal Central Agency) in 
order to coordinate intercountry a doption placement. To that end, the Federal Central 
Agency may communicate directly with all the competent agencies in Germany and abroad.  
(6) The agencies referred to in subsection (4) are required to  
1. transmit to the Federal Central Agency in respect o f each placement case within 
the meaning of subsection (1), from the first instance in which a foreign agency is 
involved, all the available personal data (name, sex, date of birth, place of birth, 
nationality, marital status and place of residence or habi tual residence) relating to the 
child, the child’s birth parents and the adoption applicants, as well as progress made on 
the placement procedure,  
2. report to the Federal Central Agency once a year, in summary form, about the 
scope, process and results of  its work in the field of intercountry adoption placement, and
3. inform the Federal Central Agency, upon request, about individual placement 
cases within the meaning of subsection (1) insofar as this is necessary to carry out the 
tasks referred to in subs ection (5) and in section 2 (2) sentence 1 of the Adoption 
Convention Implementation Act of 5 November 2001 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2950), as 
amended.  
The obligation under sentence 1 no. 1 is limited to transmission of notification that the 
placement pr ocedure has been concluded, unless it concerns Germany’s relations with other 
Contracting States to the Adoption Convention.  
(7) The Federal Central Agency stores the data transmitted in accordance with subsection 
(6) sentence 1 no. 1 in a central file sys tem. A record is to be kept of the data transmission. 
Data concerning an individual placement case are to be stored for 100 years, beginning on 
the placed child’s date of birth, and are then to be deleted.  
Section 2b  
Unmediated foreign adoption  
An intercou ntry adoption procedure is prohibited where it is to be carried out without the 
mediation of an adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)).  
Section 2c  
Principles of intercountry adoption placement  
(1) As part of an intercountry adoption placement (section 2a (1) sentence 1 and 2 and (2)), 
the adoption placement agency (section 9b and section 2 (3)) is to check the general 
suitability of the adoption applicants pursuant to sections 7 and 7b and the adoption 
placement agency (section 2a (4)) is to check the c ountry -specific suitability of the adoption 
applicants pursuant to section 7c.  
(2) The adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) is required to ensure that there is a 
specialist office in the child’s home country which is responsible for adoption placemen t and 
which is willing to cooperate (home country specialist office) and that the adoption is 
permitted by law.  
(3) When examining a proposal for a child to be placed which was made by the home
permitted by law.  
(3) When examining a proposal for a child to be placed which was made by the home 
country specialist office, the adoption placement agency (sect ion 2a (4)) is to make certain 
that 
1. the adoption is in the child’s best interests,  
2. the child is adoptable and there are no indications, based on the home country 
specialist office’s own examination, that a suitable placement can be arranged for the 
child in his or her home country,  
3. the birth parents or other persons, authorities and institutions whose consent to 
the adoption is required have been instructed about the effects of the adoption and have 
voluntarily consented to the child’s adoption in the statutorily required form and the birth 
parents have not revoked their consent,  
4. the child has been instructed, in an age - and developmentally -appropriate 
manner, about the effects of the adoption, the child’s wishes have been taken into 
consideratio n and the child has voluntarily consented to the adoption in the statutorily 
required form, and  
5. there are no indications that the consent of either the birth parents or of the 
child was obtained through the payment of any money or the granting of any ot her 
consideration.  
The adoption placement agency is required to examine the proposal for a child to be placed 
which was made by the home country specialist office as regards whether the adoption 
applicants are suited to caring for the child. In the cases r eferred to in section 2a (1)
sentence 3, subsection (3) sentence 1 and 2 applies accordingly. The result of the 
examination referred to in sentences 1 and 2 is to be placed on file.  
(4) The adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) may only approve the pr oposal made by 
the home country specialist office if the result of the suitability check, of the country -specific 
suitability check and of the examination referred to in subsection (3) sentence 4 is positive.  
(5) Where the adoption placement agency (sectio n 2a (4)) approves the proposal made by 
the home country specialist office, it informs the adoption applicants of the proposal and 
advises them about whether to accept it. If the adoption applicants accept the proposal for a 
child to be placed, the adoptio n placement agency makes a declaration to the effect that it 
consents to the adoption procedure continuing.  
(6) The adoption placement agency (section 2a (4) no. 2) forwards the declaration referred to 
in subsection (5) sentence 2 to the Land  Youth Welfare  Office’s central adoption agencies in 
accordance with section 11 (2). The adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) forwards 
the declaration referred to in subsection (5) sentence 2 to the home country specialist office.  
Section 2d  
Certification of an in tercountry adoption procedure  
(1) As part of the intercountry adoption procedure, the adoption placement agency (section 
2a (4)) which has mediated the intercountry adoption is to issue the adopters with 
certification that such mediation pursuant to sectio n 2a (2) has occurred where  
1. the declaration referred to in section 2c (5) sentence 2 has been made and has 
been forwarded to the home country specialist office, and  
2. the adopters have filed an application for recognition in accordance with section 
1 (2) of the Adoption Effects Act ( Adoptionswirkungsgesetz ). 
(2) The certificate must state the date on which the declaration referred to in section 2c (5) 
sentence 2 was made and details concerning compliance with the principles set out in
sentence 2 was made and details concerning compliance with the principles set out in 
section 2c (1) to (3). The certificate is to be submitted to the German authorities, which are to 
assess the effectiveness of a foreign adoption before taking a decision on recognising it in 
Germany in accordance with section 7 of the Adoption Effects Act.  
(3) The certifica te is valid for two years. Its validity is to be extended by one year upon 
application by the adopters. The validity of the certificate expires upon a decision on 
recognising the foreign adoption being given.  
Section 3  
Personal and professional suitability  of staff  
(1) Only professionals may be entrusted with adoption placement who are suitable on 
account of their personality, training and professional experience. The same requirements 
are made of persons who issue technical instructions to staff who are en trusted with carrying 
out adoption placement. Staff who are not directly involved in any placement activities must 
meet those requirements which correspond to the responsibilities assigned to them.  
(2) Adoption placement agencies (section 2 (1) and (3)) ar e to be staffed with at least two 
full-time professionals or a corresponding number of part -time professionals; the majority of 
these professionals’ tasks must be linked to adoption placement. The Land  Youth Welfare 
Office’s central adoption agency may per mit exceptions to sentence 1.  
Section 4  
Accreditation as an adoption placement agency  
(1) Accreditation is given to an adoption placement agency within the meaning of section 2 
(3) by the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose a rea the 
adoption placement agency has its seat, and may be given where proof is furnished that the 
agency  
1. fulfils the criteria laid down in section 3,
2. raises the expectation that it will properly fulfil its tasks, in particular in light of its 
method  of working and the financial circumstances of its legal entity, and  
3. is sponsored by a legal person or an association of persons which pursues tax -
privileged purposes within the meaning of sections 51 to 68 of the Fiscal Code 
(Abgabenordnung ). 
Adoption placement may not be the subject of any taxable economic activity.  
(2) In order to be able to carry out intercountry adoption placement, an adoption placement 
agency within the meaning of section 2 (3) requires a special licence, which is to be issued 
by the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area the adoption 
placement agency has its seat. The licence is issued in respect of the placement of children 
from one or more specific foreign countries (home countries). The licence e ntitles the agency 
to use the designation 'anerkannte Auslandsvermittlungsstelle'  (Accredited Foreign 
Placement Agency); this designation may not be used without such licence. The licence may 
be issued where proof is furnished that the agency meets the acc reditation criteria under 
subsection (1) to the specific degree necessary to carry out work in the field of intercountry 
adoption; it is to be refused where this is precluded by overriding concerns relating to 
cooperation with the respective home country. The Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central 
adoption agency and the Federal Central Agency notify each other of any facts and 
circumstances relating to an accredited foreign placement agency as referred to in 
subsection (1).  
(3) Accreditation in accordance wit h subsection (1) or licensing in accordance with 
subsection (2) is to be withdrawn where the criteria for its being given were not met. It is to 
be revoked if the criteria subsequently cease to be met. Provisions incidental to accreditation 
or licensing as  well as the consequences of infringing a particular criterion are subject to 
generally applicable legal provisions.  
(4) In order to be able to examine whether the criteria under subsection (1) or (2) sentence 3
(4) In order to be able to examine whether the criteria under subsection (1) or (2) sentence 3 
continue to be met, the Land  Youth Welfare O ffice’s central adoption agency is authorised to 
obtain information about the work of the adoption placement agency in general and in a 
specific individual case, about the personal and professional suitability of its management 
and staff, its legal circums tances and organisational structure, and about its legal entity’s 
financial circumstances. Where necessary to that end,  
1. the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency may request 
information, inspection of the files and submission of proof,  
2. staff tasked with conducting this examination are permitted to enter property 
and business premises in the course of normal business hours; the fundamental right to 
inviolability of the home (Article 13 of the Basic Law ( Grundgesetz )) is restricted to that  
extent.  
The adoption placement agency (section 2 (3), section 2a (4) no. 2) immediately informs the 
central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area the adoption 
placement agency has its seat where it has received information that i t will no longer be in a 
position to properly fulfil its tasks. This is, in particular, to be assumed to be the case where 
the criteria under section 3 and subsection (1) sentence 1 no. 2 are no longer met.  
(5) Objections and contestation suits against ord ers issued by the Land  Youth Welfare 
Office’s central adoption agency do not have suspensive effect.  
Section 4a  
Procedure upon closure of an adoption placement agency  
(1) Where it is clear that an adoption placement agency (section 2 (3), section 2a (4) no . 2) is 
to close, it must immediately notify the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare
(1) Where it is clear that an adoption placement agency (section 2 (3), section 2a (4) no . 2) is 
to close, it must immediately notify the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare 
Office in whose area it has its seat, as well as the adoption applicants and adopters whom it 
is supporting, about the fact that it will be closing. Further , it must inform the adoption 
applicants and adopters about the consequences of its closing, in particular about the
possibility of the placement procedure continuing and about file retention. Sentences 1 and 2 
apply accordingly where the adoption placemen t agency (section 2a (4) no. 2) permanently 
loses its licence in a home country.  
(2) Where an adoption placement agency (section 2 (3), section 2a (4) no. 2) closes, it 
immediately forwards those records and documents concerning each individual placement 
case (placement files) in all concluded and ongoing placement procedures to the central 
adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area it had its seat. Where it is 
already clear when an adoption placement agency (section 2 (3), section 2a ( 4) no. 2) closes 
which adoption placement agency (section 9b, section 2 (3), section 2a (4)) is to continue an 
ongoing placement procedure, the adoption placement agency which is closing immediately 
forwards the placement files to that adoption placement a gency.  
(3) Where, after an adoption placement agency (section 2a (4) no. 2) closes, reports 
concerning a child’s development (section 9 (4) sentence 1) still need to be prepared, the 
placement files are to be immediately forwarded to the local adoption pla cement agency 
(section 9b), which thereupon prepares these reports. The local adoption placement agency 
sends the reports to the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose 
area the adopters are habitually resident for forwarding in accordance with section 9 (4) 
sentence 1 no. 2. Once the last report has been prepared, the placement files are to be 
handed over to the central adoption agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area 
the adoption placement agency which closed had its seat so that they may be stored in 
accordance with section 9c (1).  
Section 5  
Prohibitions relating to placement  
(1) Adoption placement may only be carried out by those Youth Welfare Offices and Land  
Youth Welfare Offices which are authorised in accorda nce with section 2 (1) and by those 
agencies which are authorised in accordance with section 2 (3); all other agencies are
agencies which are authorised in accordance with section 2 (3); all other agencies are 
prohibited from carrying out adoption placement.  
(2) It is prohibited, by means of giving or providing, for a commercial or business purpose, 
pregnant women resident or habitually resident within the area of application of this Act the 
opportunity to give birth outside the area of application of this Act,  
1. to determine that they are to hand over their child there for adoption,  
2. to assist them in giving up their child in this way.  
(3) It is prohibited to carry out placement activities with the objective of enabling a third party 
to permanently take in a child, in particular by means of a man acknowledging paternity of a 
child which h e did not father. Any authorisation to mediate adoption which results from other 
legal provisions remains unaffected.  
Section 6  
Advertising  
(1) It is prohibited to seek or offer children for adoption or adoption applicants by means of 
public declarations, in particular newspaper advertisements or newspaper reports. Section 5 
remains unaffected.  
(2) Publication of a declaration as referred to in subsection (1) together with an identifier is 
prohibited.  
(3) Subsection (1) sentence 1 applies accordingly to pub lic declarations which refer to 
placement activities as referred to in section 5 (3) sentence 1.  
(4) Subsections (1) to (3) also apply where a child has not yet been born or has not yet been 
conceived, unless the declaration refers to surrogacy.  
Section 7  
Right to conduct of a suitability check when adopting a child in Germany; scope of 
the suitability check
(1) On application by the adoption applicants, the adoption placement agency (section 2 (1)) 
conducts a check of their general suitability (suitability  check) to adopt a child habitually 
resident in Germany. The adoption placement agencies referred to in section 2 (3) are also 
authorised to conduct the suitability check.  
(2) The suitability check in particular encompasses the following:  
1. the adoption a pplicants’ personal and family circumstances,  
2. the adoption applicants’ state of health,  
3. the adoption applicants’ social environment,  
4. the adoption applicants’ motivation for wanting to adopt,  
5. the characteristics of those children for whom the ad option applicants are able 
and willing to care.  
(3) The adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) prepares a report detailing the 
result of its suitability check. The result of the suitability check is to be notified to the adoption 
applicants. The  report which positively attests to their suitability may not be handed over to 
the adoption applicants.  
Section 7a  
Appropriate enquiries in the case of the adoption of a child in Germany  
(1) Where an adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) becom es aware of a child 
who is being considered for adoption placement, it immediately conducts appropriate 
enquiries in respect of the adoption applicants, the child and the child’s family in preparation 
for the adoption placement procedure. In particular, it  examines whether the adoption 
applicants are suited to adopt the child, thereby taking account of the child’s personality and 
specific needs.  
(2) The appropriate enquiries in respect of the adoption applicants and the child’s family are 
as a rule to begin  before the child is born where it is to be expected that consent will be 
given to the child’s adoption.  
(3) Upon the request of an adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)), the local 
adoption placement agency (section 9b) in whose area the adopti on applicants are habitually
adoption placement agency (section 9b) in whose area the adopti on applicants are habitually 
resident conducts the appropriate enquiries in respect of the adoption applicants.  
(4) The result of the appropriate enquiries is to be notified to those concerned in each case.  
Section 7b  
Right to conduct of a suitability chec k in the case of the adoption of a child from 
abroad  
(1) On application by the adoption applicants, a local adoption placement agency within the 
meaning of section 9b conducts a suitability check of the adoption applicants in respect of 
the adoption of a c hild habitually resident abroad. The adoption placement agencies referred 
to in section 2 (3) are also authorised to conduct the suitability check.  
(2) The adoption placement agency (section 9b, section 2 (3)) prepares a report detailing the 
result of its suitability check, which it then forwards to an adoption placement agency 
(section 2a (4)) designated by the adoption applicants. Section 7 (3) sentence 2 and 3 
applies.  
(3) Where the suitability check is conducted by an adoption placement agency as referr ed to 
in section 2 (3), this agency may not also be the adoption placement agency (section 2a (4) 
no. 2) designated by the adoption applicants.  
Section 7c  
Country -specific suitability check in the case of the adoption of a child from abroad  
(1) If the resu lt of the suitability check has been determined to be positive, the adoption 
placement agency (section 2a (4)) designated by the adoption applicants conducts a check 
of the adoption applicants’ country -specific suitability.
(2) The country -specific suitabi lity check in particular encompasses the following:  
1. the adoption applicants’ knowledge of and engagement with the culture of and 
social situation in the child’s home country,  
2. the adoption applicants’ willingness to integrate the child’s origin into t heir future 
family life, and  
3. the adoption applicants’ willingness to engage with the child’s specific needs on 
account of his or her origin and on account of the child switching cultures.  
If the adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) designated by t he adoption applicants 
feels that they fulfil the criteria of the country -specific suitability check, it includes the result of 
its country -specific suitability check in the report on the suitability check. The adoption 
applicants are to be notified of the  result of the country -specific suitability check. The report 
which determines the positive result may not be handed over to the adoption applicants.  
(3) If the result of the suitability check and of the country -specific suitability check has been 
determin ed to be positive, the adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) designated by the 
adoption applicants forwards the report to the specialist office in the child’s home country.  
Section 7d  
Certification for adoption applicants living abroad  
(1) On applicat ion by German adoption applicants habitually resident abroad, the Federal 
Central Agency conducts a check as to whether the adoption applicants are legally entitled 
to adopt a child in accordance with German substantive legal provisions.  
(2) If the Federal  Central Agency determines that the adoption applicants are legally entitled 
to adopt, it issues them with a certificate attesting thereto.  
(3) The check and the certification encompass neither the health of the adoption applicants 
nor their suitability to  adopt a child pursuant to sections 7b and 7c; reference thereto is to be 
made in the certificate.  
Section 7e  
Adoption applicants’ duty to cooperate  
Adoption applicants are obliged to provide the necessary details and furnish suitable proof 
for the followi ng:
Adoption applicants are obliged to provide the necessary details and furnish suitable proof 
for the followi ng: 
1. the suitability check (section 7 and section 7b (1) and (2)),  
2. the appropriate enquiries (section 7a (1) and (2)),  
3. the country -specific suitability check (section 7c (1) and (2)),  
4. the check conducted in accordance with section 7d (1).  
The pr ovisions of Title 3 Part 3 of Book One of the Social Code ( Erstes Buch 
Sozialgesetzbuch ) apply accordingly.  
Section 8  
Start of adoptive care  
A child may not begin the period of acclimatisation in the care of the adoption applicants 
(adoptive care) until it  is clear that the adoption applicants are suited to adopt the child.  
Section 8a  
Information -sharing or contact before and after adoption  
(1) Before the adoptive care begins, the adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) is 
to discuss with both the  adoption applicants and the child’s birth parents whether, in future, 
the adoption applicants and the child on the one hand and the child’s birth parents on the 
other hand may share information or contact may take place in the child’s interests and what 
form that information -sharing and contact may take. The adoption placement agency places 
the results of these discussions on file.
(2) With the consent of the placing parents and of the adopters, the adoption placement 
agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) is as a  general rule to repeat the discussions referred to in 
subsection (1) sentence 1 at appropriate intervals following the adoption. This applies until 
the child reaches the age of 16 years. The result of each of these discussions is to be placed 
on file. Con sent is as a rule to be obtained before the family court issues the decision to 
grant the adoption, and must be given at the latest following that decision. Consent may be 
revoked at any time.  
(3) The child is to be involved in the discussions referred to  in subsections (1) and (2) in a 
developmentally -appropriate manner, and appropriate consideration is to be given to the 
child’s interests.  
(4) If the result of the discussion concerning information -sharing or contact is not 
implemented or unanimity cannot  be reached about implementing the result, the adoption 
placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) is to work towards finding a solution within existing 
possibilities.  
Section 8b  
Right of the placing parents to general information about the child and the chi ld’s 
situation in life following adoption  
(1) The placing parents have a right vis -à-vis the adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) 
and (3)) to be given access to that general information about the child and the child’s 
situation in life which the adopte rs have voluntarily provided to the adoption placement 
agency, thereby safeguarding the child’s personal rights, for the purpose of its being passed 
on to the placing parents. The adoption placement agency grants the placing parents access 
to this informat ion, unless this is contrary to the child’s best interests.  
(2) With the adopters’ consent, the adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) is to 
work towards the adopters providing it with general information as referred to in subsection 
(1) in writ ing and at regular intervals until the child reaches the age of 16 years, unless this is
(1) in writ ing and at regular intervals until the child reaches the age of 16 years, unless this is 
contrary to the child’s best interests. The child is to be involved in a developmentally -
appropriate manner. Consent is as a rule to be obtained before the family cour t issues the 
decision to grant the adoption, and must be given at the latest following that decision. 
Consent may be revoked at any time.  
Section 9  
Right to adoption support  
(1) Adoption placement agencies (section 2 (1), section 2a (4) no. 1) are required  to support 
the adoption applicants, the birth parents and the child before and during the adoption 
placement procedure as well as throughout the period of adoptive care. The adoption 
placement agencies referred to in section 2 (3) and section 2a (4) no. 2  are also authorised 
to provide adoption support. Adoption support in particular encompasses the following:  
1. the provision of general counselling to the adoption applicants, the birth parents 
and the child on issues relating to the adoption and the provi sion of needs -based support,  
2. the provision of information about the conditions for and course of the adoption 
procedure, as well as about the legal consequences of the adoption,  
3. the provision of information to the placing parents concerning supportin g 
measures provided by the child and youth welfare services as an alternative to adoption, 
as well as the provision of support to the placing parents in dealing with the social and 
psychological effects associated with being about to or already having prov ided consent 
to the child’s adoption,  
4.  the provision of information about the child’s rights, with emphasis being placed 
on how important it is for the child’s development to know his or her origin,  
5. working towards the adoption applicants telling the  child, from the very
on how important it is for the child’s development to know his or her origin,  
5. working towards the adoption applicants telling the  child, from the very 
beginning, about his or her origin in an age - and developmentally -appropriate manner,
6. the provision of information about the possibilities for and means of organising 
the information -sharing or contact between the adoption applican ts and the child on the 
one hand and the birth parents on the other, in accordance with sections 8a and 8b,  
7. the discussion of how to structure the information -sharing or contact between 
the adoption applicants and the child on the one hand and the birth  parents on the other 
hand, in accordance with section 8a, and  
8. the provision of information about the right to inspect the files under section 9c 
(2) and information about the possibilities for finding out the child’s origin.  
(2) After the family court issues the order to grant the adoption, the child, the adopters and 
the placing parents are entitled to follow -up adoption support from the adoption placement 
agency (section 2 (1), section 2a (4) no. 1). The adoption placement agencies referred to in 
section 2 (3) and in section 2a (4) no. 2 are also authorised to provide follow -up adoption 
support. Follow -up adoption support in particular encompasses the following:  
1. the provision of needs -based counselling and support to the child, the adopters 
and the placing parents,  
2. the encouragement and support of information -sharing or contact between the 
adopters and the child on the one hand and the placing parents on the other hand, in 
accordance with sections 8a and 8b,  
3. the provision of support to the plac ing parents in dealing with the social and 
psychological effects associated with their decision to consent to the child’s adoption, in 
particular by indicating what help is available from other specialist services,  
4. the provision of support to the adopte rs when it comes to telling the child, in an 
age-appropriate manner, about his or her origin,  
5. the provision of support to the child in seeking his or her origin, including 
supporting a child whose birth was confidential when inspecting the files regardi ng his or 
her origin pursuant to section 31 (1) of the Act on Pregnancies in Conflict Situations 
(Schwangerschaftskonfliktgesetz ).
(Schwangerschaftskonfliktgesetz ). 
(3) In the context of providing adoption support within the meaning of subsections (1) and 
(2), the adoption placement agency  (section 2 (1) and (3), section 2a (4)) is to indicate, as 
and when necessary and with the agreement of those to be counselled, what assistance and 
support is available from other specialist services. If those to be counselled so wish, it is to 
contact th ose other specialist services.  
(4) Insofar as it is necessary to fulfil the adoption criteria laid down by a home country, the 
adoption applicants and the adoption placement agency (section 2a (4)) may agree in writing 
that the adoption placement agency wi ll 
1. monitor, for a period of time to be determined in the agreement, the child’s 
development following adoption, and  
2. report to the competent agency in the home country about the child’s 
development.  
With the consent of another adoption placement agenc y (section 2 (1) and (3), section 2a 
(4)), agreement may be reached that this agency will take on the task described in sentence 
1 no. 1 and forward the results to the adoption placement agency referred to in sentence 1. 
Section 4a (3) applies in the event  of the adoption placement agency (section 2a (4) no. 2) 
closing.  
Section 9a  
Obligatory counselling in the case of stepchild adoption
(1) Where one spouse alone adopts his or her spouse’s child, the following must undergo 
counselling by the adoption placem ent agency (section 2 (1) and (3)) in accordance with 
section 9 (1) before they make the necessary declarations and applications relating to the 
adoption:  
1. the adoptive child’s birth parents,  
2. the adopters,  
3. the child pursuant to section 8 of Book Ei ght of the Social Code ( Achtes Buch 
Sozialgesetzbuch ). 
(2) The adoption placement agency is required to issue a certificate concerning the 
counselling.  
(3) Counselling of the following is not necessary:  
1.  a parent who is permanently not in a position to make a declaration,  
2. a parent whose place of residence is permanently unknown,  
3. a parent whose consent is substituted in accordance with section 1748 of the 
German Civil Code ( Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch ), or 
4. a placing parent who is habitually resident abroad.  
(4) The obligation to undergo counselling in accordance with subsection (1) does not apply 
where the adoptive parent is married to the child’s birth parent at the time of the child’s birth. 
The adopting and the other parent’s obligation to undergo counselling still applies if the child 
was born abroad and the placing parent is habitually resident abroad.  
(5) Subsections (1) to (4) apply accordingly in the cases referred to in section 1766a of the 
German Civil Code.  
Section 9b  
Local adoption placemen t agency; mandatory tasks  
The Youth Welfare Offices are required to ensure that the tasks referred to in sections 7, 7a, 
7b, 8a, 8b, 9 and 9a are carried out in their respective areas. Local jurisdiction in respect of 
adoption applicants and adopters is de termined by their place of habitual residence.  
Section 9c  
Placement files  
(1) Placement files are to be stored for 100 years, beginning on the day of the child’s birth.
(1) Placement files are to be stored for 100 years, beginning on the day of the child’s birth.  
(2) Insofar as the placement files concern the child’s origin and biography or another 
legitimate interest exists, the child’s legal representative and, when the child has reached the 
age of 16 years, the child himself or herself may apply to inspect the files under the 
supervision of a professional. Inspection of the files is to be refused where this is precluded 
by the overriding interests of the data subject.  
(3) The adoption placement agency (section 2 (1) and (3), section 2a (4)) is required to 
inform the adopters of the child’s right to inspect the files as per subsection (2) sentence 1  as 
soon as the child reaches the age of 16 years.  
Section 9d  
Implementing provisions  
(1) The Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth is authorised, 
with the agreement of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Affairs, t o make detailed 
provision, by way of a statutory instrument requiring the consent of the Bundesrat, 
concerning the accreditation and supervision of adoption placement agencies pursuant to 
section 2 (3) and sections 3 and 4, concerning cooperation in relati on to intercountry 
adoption placement pursuant to section 2a (5) and (6), appropriate enquiries pursuant to 
section 7a, the suitability check pursuant to sections 7, 7b and 7c, certification pursuant to
section 7d, adoption support pursuant to section 9, t he granting of inspection of the files 
pursuant to section 9c and the principles which the adoption placement agencies must 
comply with in that regard. The following in particular may be regulated by way of a statutory 
instrument in accordance with sentenc e 1: 
1. the timing, structure and form of the reports to be prepared in accordance with 
section 2a (6) sentence 1 no. 1 and no. 2, and sentence 2,  
2. the requirements made of the personal and professional suitability of staff 
working in an adoption placeme nt agency (section 3, section 4 (1) sentence 1 no. 1),  
3. the requirements made of the method of working and financial circumstances of 
an adoption placement agency’s legal entity (section 4 (1) sentence 1 no. 2),  
4. the special requirements for licensing in respect of intercountry adoption 
placement (section 4 (2)),  
5. the filing of applications and proof to be furnished in the procedure described in 
section 7d,  
6. the timing and form of the notification to be made to adopters in accordance 
with section 9 (1) and (2) about the range of adoption support services available,  
7. the procedure in accordance with section 4a in the event of an adoption 
placement agency closing.  
(2) Moreover, a statutory instrument as referred to in subsection (1) sentence 1 may al so 
regulate that the body responsible for governmental adoption placement agencies may levy 
fees from adoption applicants for the conduct of the suitability check pursuant to sections 7, 
7b and 7c or in relation to intercountry adoption placement as well a s expenses incurred for 
the procurement of documents, for translations and the remuneration of experts. The 
individual fees and the amount of the fees are to be determined; the total fees levied for each 
individual placement procedure may not exceed two th ousand five hundred euros. As long 
as the Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth does not make 
use of its authorisation under subsection (1) sentence 1 in conjunction with sentence 1, this
use of its authorisation under subsection (1) sentence 1 in conjunction with sentence 1, this 
authorisation may be exercised by th e Land  governments; the Land  governments may 
transfer this authorisation to the highest Land  authorities by way of a statutory instrument.  
Section 9e  
Data protection  
(1) Chapter 2 of Book Ten of the Social Code ( Zehntes Buch Sozialgesetzbuch ) applies to 
the processing of personal data, with the proviso that data which have been gathered for 
adoption placement and for other purposes under this Act may only be processed for the 
following purposes:  
1. adoption placement or adoption support,  
2. the accreditatio n, licensing or oversight of adoption placement agencies,  
3. the monitoring of prohibitions relating to placement,  
4. the prosecution of serious criminal offences ( Verbrechen ) or other offences of 
substantial significance,  
5. international cooperation in t hese areas, or  
6. the carrying out of specific scientific projects to conduct research into possible 
politically motivated adoption placement in the German Democratic Republic (GDR).  
In the cases referred to in sentence 1 no. 6, the data subjects may not b e contacted. 
Provisions concerning international mutual assistance remain unaffected.
(2) The Federal Central Agency transmits to the competent agencies, upon their request, the 
personal data required for the purposes referred to in subsection (1). The req uest must state 
the purposes for which the data are required.  
(3) The requesting agency bears responsibility for the permissibility of the data transmission. 
The Federal Central Agency only examines whether the request for data transmission falls 
within th e bounds of the tasks of the requesting agency, unless there is special reason to 
examine the permissibility of the data transmission.  
(4) When transmitting data to a foreign agency or to a domestic non -public agency, the 
Federal Central Agency indicates t hat the data may only be processed for the purpose for 
which they are being transmitted.  
Section 10  
Notification of the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency  
(1) Adoption placement agencies must notify the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central 
adoption agency where a child cannot be placed in the care of the adoption applicants with a 
view to adoption within three months following conclusion of its enquiries. Such notification is 
not necessary if, upon the expiry of this time limit, it is guaran teed that the child will be 
placed in adoptive care.  
(2) Subsection (1) applies accordingly where adoption applicants who have been subject to 
enquiries are willing and suited to adopting a child who is difficult to place insofar as the 
adoption applicants  consent to the central adoption agency being notified.  
(3) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) sentence 1, the adoption placement agency and 
the central adoption agency seek suitable adoption applicants. They notify each other of the 
results of the ir efforts. In individual cases the central adoption agency may itself take on the 
task of placing a child.  
Section 11  
Tasks of the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency  
(1) The Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency supports the  work of the 
adoption placement agency, in particular by providing technical guidance  
1. where a child is difficult to place,  
2. where an adoption applicant or the child is a foreign national or stateless 
person,
2. where an adoption applicant or the child is a foreign national or stateless 
person,  
3. where an adoption applicant or the child  is resident or habitually resident 
outside the area of application of this Act,  
4. in other difficult individual cases.  
(2) In the cases referred to in subsection (1) no. 2 and no. 3, the adoption placement agency 
(section 2 (1) and (3), section 2a (4) no . 2) is to involve the central adoption agency of that 
Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area it has its seat as well as the central adoption 
agency of that Land  Youth Welfare Office in whose area the adopters are habitually resident 
as soon as the approp riate enquiries pursuant to section 7a begin. Documents of the kind 
referred to in Articles 15 and 16 of the Adoption Convention are to be submitted for 
inspection to the central adoption agencies referred to in sentence 1.  
Section 12  
(repealed)  
Section 13  
Staffing of the Land  Youth Welfare Office’s central adoption agency  
In order to be able to fulfil its tasks the central adoption agency must as a rule to have at its 
disposal at least one paediatrician or child psychiatrist, one psychologist with experien ce in 
the field of child psychology, a legally trained person, as well as social pedagogues or social 
workers with several years of professional experience.
Part 2  
Surrogacy  
Section 13a  
Surrogate mother  
'Surrogate mother' means a woman who is willing, on t he basis of an agreement,  
1. to undergo artificial or natural insemination, or  
2. to undergo implantation of an embryo which is not her own or to otherwise carry 
such an embryo to term,  
and, after giving birth, to hand the child over to third parties for a doption or other placement 
in permanent care.  
Section 13b  
Surrogacy placement  
'Surrogacy placement' means the matching of persons wishing to adopt or permanently care 
for a child born to a surrogate mother (commissioning parents) with a woman who is willin g 
to act as surrogate. It also means the provision of proof of the opportunity to conclude an 
agreement as referred to in section 13a.  
Section 13c  
Prohibition of surrogacy placement  
Surrogacy placement is prohibited.  
Section 13d  
Prohibition of advertising  
It is prohibited to seek or offer surrogate mothers or commissioning parents by means of 
public declarations, in particular newspaper advertisements or newspaper reports.  
Part 3  
Criminal and administrative fines provisions  
Section 14  
Administrative fines p rovisions  
(1) Anyone who,  
1. contrary to section 5 (1) or (3) sentence 1, carries out placement activities, or  
2. contrary to section 6 (1) sentence 1, also in conjunction with (2) or (3), or 
section 13d, by public declarations seeks or offers  
a) children for adoption or adoption applicants,  
b) children or third parties for the purposes referred to in section 5 (3) sentence 
1, 
c) surrogate mothers or commissioning parents,  
is deemed to have committed an administrative offence.  
(2) Anyone who,  
1. contrary to  section 5 (1) or (3) sentence 1, carries out placement activities and 
thereby causes a child to be brought into the area of application of this Act or to be taken
thereby causes a child to be brought into the area of application of this Act or to be taken 
out of the area of application of this Act, or  
2. for a commercial or business purpose,  
a) contrary to section 5 (2) no. 1, determines that a pregnant woman is to hand 
over her child, or
b) contrary to section 5 (2) no. 2, assists a pregnant woman in handing over her 
child,  
is also deemed to have committed an administrative offence.  
(3) In the ca ses referred to in subsection (1), an administrative fine of up to five thousand 
euros may be imposed as a penalty for the administrative offence, in the cases referred to in 
subsection (2) an administrative fine of up to thirty thousand euros.  
Section 14a  
(repealed)  
Section 14b  
Criminal provisions relating to surrogacy placement  
(1) Anyone who, contrary to section 13c, carries out surrogacy placement incurs a penalty of 
up to one year’s imprisonment or an administrative fine.  
(2) Anyone who receives or acc epts a promise of a pecuniary benefit for surrogacy 
placement incurs a penalty of up to two years’ imprisonment or an administrative fine. Where 
the offender acts for a commercial or business purpose, the penalty is up to three years’ 
imprisonment or an ad ministrative fine.  
(3) In the cases referred to in subsections (1) and (2), the surrogate mother and the 
commissioning parents go unpunished.  
Part 4  
Transitional and final provisions  
Section 15  
Applicable law  
From the point in time at which an amendment to  this Act enters into force, the further 
conduct of an adoption placement procedure which began before that amendment entered 
into force is governed by the amended provisions, unless otherwise provided.  
Section 16  
Report  
The Federal Government will, by 30 September 2026, submit to the German Bundestag a 
report concerning the impact of sections 2a, 2b, 2c, 2d, 8a, 8b and 9a, as well as concerning 
any amendments to these provisions which may be necessary. The report may not contain 
any personal data.
Act on Mandatory Working Conditions for Workers Posted 
Across Borders and for Workers Regularly Employed in 
Germany  
(Arbeitnehmer -Entsendegesetz – AEntG)  
Posted Workers Act of 20 April 2009 (Federal La w Gazette I, p.  799), as last amended by 
Article 1 of the Act of 28 June  2023 (Federal Law Gazette 2023 I No. 172 ) 
Division  1 
Purpose  
Section  1 
Purpose  
The objectives of this Act are to establish and enforce appropriate minimum working 
conditions for worke rs who are posted across borders and for workers who are regularly 
employed in Germany, as well as to guarantee fair and effective conditions of competition by 
extending the coverage of the provisions of sector -specific collective agreements. The aim is 
thus both to preserve jobs which are subject to social security contributions and to safeguard 
the role which collective bargaining autonomy plays in terms of conflict resolution and 
structuring relations between the social partners.  
Division  2 
General worki ng conditions  
Section  2 
General working conditions  
(1) The rules in statutory or administrative provisions relating to the following working 
conditions are also mandatorily applicable to employment relationships between employers 
established abroad and the ir workers employed in Germany:  
1. remuneration, including overtime rates, though not rules relating to occupational 
pension schemes,  
2. minimum paid annual leave,  
3. maximum work periods , minimum rest periods  and break periods , 
4. conditions for hiring ou t workers, in particular the supply of workers by 
temporary work agencies,  
5. health, safety and hygiene at work, including requirements made of 
accommodation provided directly or indirectly, for a fee or free of charge, by an employer 
to workers who are s ent from their regular place of employment,
6. protective measures with regard to the conditions of employment of pregnant 
women and women who have recently given birth, of children and young people,  
7. gender equality and other provisions on non -discrimin ation, and  
8. allowances paid or the reimbursement of expenditure to cover travel, board and 
lodging for workers who are away from home for professional reasons.  
(2) An employer established abroad employs a worker in Germany even if that worker is 
temporar ily supplied to a user enterprise established abroad or in Germany and that user 
enterprise employs the worker in Germany.  
(3) Subsection  (1) no.  8 applies to employers established abroad if their workers  
1. have to travel to or from their regular place of  employment in Germany, or  
2. are temporarily sent by their employer from their regular place of employment in 
Germany to another place of employment.  
Section  2a 
Remuneration  
ʻRemunerationʼ within the meaning of section  2 (1) no.  1 encompasses all those constituent 
elements of remuneration , which workers receive from their employer in cash or in kind for 
work performed. More specifically, remuneration includes basic remuneratio n, including 
those constituent elements , which are linked to the type of task performed by workers, their 
qualifications and work experience, and the region, as well as allowances, bonuses and 
gratuities, including overtime rates. Remuneration also encompa sses rules governing its due 
date, including exceptions and conditions for their application.  
Section  2b 
Crediting of allowance for posting  
(1) If workers receive an allowance from an employer established abroad for the period in 
which they are performing work in Germany (allowance for posting), this may be credited 
against remuneration as defined in section  2 (1) no.  1. This does not apply to the extent that 
the allowance for posting is paid in reimbursement of costs , which are actually incurred on 
account  of the posting (costs of posting). Costs of posting in particular include expenditure to 
cover travel, board and lodging.
cover travel, board and lodging.  
(2) If the working conditions applicable to the employment relationship do not stipulate which 
constituent elements of an allowance f or posting are to be paid in reimbursement of the 
costs of posting or which constituent elements of an allowance for posting form part of 
remuneration, it is irrefutably assumed that the entire allowance for posting is paid in 
reimbursement of the costs of  posting.  
Division  3 
Working conditions based on collective agreements  
Section  3 
Working conditions based on collective agreements  
Under the conditions of sections  4 to 6, the provisions of a national collective agreement are 
also mandatorily applicable to  employment relationships between employers established 
abroad and their workers who are employed within the area of application of that collective 
agreement if  
1. the collective agreement has been declared universally applicable, or  
2. a statutory instrum ent has been issued in accordance with section  7 or section  
7a. 
Section  2 (2) applies accordingly. No national collective agreement is required where 
working conditions within the meaning of section  5 no.  2, no. 3 or no. 4 which, when taken
together, cover  the entire area of application of this Act form the subject matter of collectively 
agreed regulations.  
Section  4 
Sectors  
(1) Section  3 sentence  1 no.  2 applies to collective agreements applicable to  
1. the main or ancillary building industry within the me aning of the Ordinance 
Relating to Establishments Engaged in Building Work ( Baubetriebe -Verordnung ) of 28  
October  1980 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  2033), as last amended by the Ordinance of 26  
April 2006 (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  1085), as amended, includi ng the provision of 
assembly services on building sites located outside of the place of business,  
2. facility cleaning services,  
3. postal services,  
4. security services,  
5. specialist mining work in hard coal mines,  
6. laundering services in the business -to-business sector,  
7. the waste industry, including road cleaning and winter road clearance services,  
8. education and training services pursuant to Book Two of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch II ) or Book Three of the Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch III ), and 
9. slaughtering and meat processing.  
(2) Further, section  3 sentence  1 no.  2 applies to collective agreements applicable to all 
sectors other than those referred to in subsection  (1) if coverage of the provisions of the 
respective collective agreement  appears necessary in the public interest in order to achieve 
the objectives under section  1 and, in particular, to counter predatory competition in respect 
of wage costs . 
Section  5 
Working conditions  
A collective agreement as referred to in section  3 may set out  
1. minimum pay rates, which may differ depending on the type of task performed 
by workers and their qualifications and by region, including overtime rates, whereby the 
types of tasks and qualifications may be grouped into a total of up to three pay  grades,  
1a. constituent elements of remuneration as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 other
1a. constituent elements of remuneration as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 other 
than those included in no.  1 above,  
2. the amount of recreational leave, holiday pay or additional holiday pay,  
3. the collection of contributions and granting of  benefits in connection with holiday 
entitlements as set out in no.  2 by a joint facility of the parties to the collective agreement 
where it is guaranteed that the foreign employer is not simultaneously required to pay 
contributions towards that joint fac ility and towards a comparable facility in the state of the 
employer’s establishment and the procedure applied by the joint facility of the parties to 
the collective agreement involves crediting those benefits which the foreign employer has 
already extende d to workers in the fulfilment of their holiday entitlement as provided by 
statute, collective agreement or individual agreement,  
4. the requirements made of accommodation provided directly or indirectly, for a 
fee or free of charge, by an employer to work ers who are sent from their regular place of 
employment, and
5. working conditions within the meaning of section  2 no.  3 to no.  8. 
Working conditions under sentence  1 no.  1 to no.  3 also encompass rules governing the due 
date of the relevant entitlements, including any agreed exceptions thereto and the conditions 
for their application . 
Section  6 
Special provisions  
(1) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  1, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its indep endent departments predominantly 
provides building services in accordance with section  101 (2) of Book Three of the Social 
Code.  
(2) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  2, this Division 
applies where an establishment o r one of its independent departments predominantly 
provides facility cleaning services.  
(3) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  3, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments pred ominantly carries 
mail for third parties on a commercial basis or as a recurring pursuit.  
(4) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  4, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments pr edominantly 
provides services in the security guard and security sector or inspection and public order 
services which serve the protection of all types of legal interests, in particular life, health or 
property.  
(5) In the case of a collective agreement as  referred to in section  4 (1) no.  5, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments, on behalf of a third 
party, predominantly excavates pits in domestic hard coal mines or carries out other special 
underground mining wo rk. 
(6) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  6, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly 
launders textiles on a commercial basis for commercial clients as well as for public -sector or
launders textiles on a commercial basis for commercial clients as well as for public -sector or 
church facilities, regardless of whether that laundry is the property of the laundry facility or of 
the client. This Division does not apply to laund ering  services provided by workshops for 
persons with disabilities within the meaning of section  219 of Book Nine of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch IX ). 
(7) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  7, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly 
collects , transports, stores, treats, disposes of or recycles waste within the meaning of 
section  3 (1) sentence  1 of the Circular Economy Act ( Kreislaufwirtschaftsgesetz ) or provides 
the services of sweeping and cleaning public thoroughfares and the clearing of p ublic 
thoroughfares of snow and ice, including by gritting and salting.  
(8) In the case of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  8, this Division 
applies where an establishment or one of its independent departments predominantly carrie s 
out education and training measures in accordance with Book Two or Book Three of the 
Social Code. Vocational rehabilitation facilities within the meaning of section  51 (1) sentence  
1 of Book Nine of the Social Code are exempted therefrom.  
(9) In the case  of a collective agreement as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  9, this Division 
applies in establishments or one of their independent departments in which animals are 
predominantly slaughtered or meat is predominantly processed (establishments in the meat 
sector) and in establishments or one of their independent departments which predominantly 
deploy their workers in establishments in the meat sector. ʻSlaughteringʼ here refers to all the
sector) and in establishments or one of their independent departments which predominantly 
deploy their workers in establishments in the meat sector. ʻSlaughteringʼ here refers to all the 
tasks involved in the slaughter ing and cutting of animals, except fish. ʻProcessingʼ here 
refers to all the tasks involved in the subsequent processing of meat products resulting from 
slaughtering to produce food, as w ell as portioning and packaging. It does not encompass 
that processing in which the treatment, portioning or packaging of meat products resulting 
from slaughtering is done on the direct request of the end consumer.
(10) Where a collective agreement as refe rred to in subsections  (1) to (9) defines the term 
ʻestablishment ʼ or ʻindependent departmentʼ, that definition is definitive.  
Section  7 
Statutory instrument in cases under section  4 (1) 
(1) At the joint request of the parties to a collective agreement within the meaning of section  
4 (1) and sections  5 and  6, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, 
by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, that the 
provisions of that collective agreement apply to all employers and workers included in its 
scope of application and not bound by it if this appears necessary in the public interest in 
order to achieve the legislative objectives under section  1. Sentence  1 does not apply to 
working conditions based on collective agreements under section  5 sentence  1 no.  1a. 
(2) Where several collective agreements applicable in a particular sector at least partially 
overlap in terms of the sector -specific activities to which they apply, the Federal Ministry of 
Labour and Social Affairs is required, when taking its decision in accordance with subsection  
(1) as part of its overall assessment, not only to take account of the legislative objectives 
under section  1 but also of the representativity of the respective collective agreements. 
When determining such representativity, co nsideration is primarily to be given to  
1. the number of workers covered by the scope of application of the collective 
agreement who are employed by the respective employers bound by the collective 
agreement,  
2. the number of members of the trade union whi ch concluded the collective 
agreement who are covered by the scope of application of the respective collective 
agreement.  
(3) Where applications have been made for several collective agreements to be declared 
universally applicable, the Federal Ministry of  Labour and Social Affairs is required to take 
especial care when weighing up those interests with constitutional status affected by the 
decision and to strike a careful balance between the competing basic rights.  
(4) Before issuing a statutory instrument,  the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
(4) Before issuing a statutory instrument,  the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives those employers and workers covered by the scope of application of that statutory 
instrument, the parties to the collective agreement and, in the cases referred to in subsection  
(2), the parties to o ther collective agreements, as well as commissions constituted on the 
basis of parity which lay down working conditions under canon law for the remit of church 
employers covered, at least in part, by the scope of application of the statutory instrument 
the opportunity to submit a written statement within three weeks, which period begins to run 
as from the day of publication of the draft of the statutory instrument.  
(5) If a request as referred to in subsection  (1) is submitted, for the first time, in one of  the 
sectors referred to in section  4 (1), then after the expiry of the time limit under subsection  (4), 
the Committee as referred to in section  5 (1) sentence  1 of the Collective Agreements Act 
(Tarifvertragsgesetz ) (Collective Agreements Committee) is in volved. If at least four of the 
members of the Committee vote for the application or the Committee does not submit a 
statement within a period of two months, a statutory instrument as referred to in subsection  
(1) may be issued. If two or three members of the Committee vote for the application, a 
statutory instrument can only be issued by the Federal Government. Sentences  1 to 3 do not 
apply to collective agreements as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  1 to no.  8. 
Section  7a 
Statutory instrument in cases und er section  4 (2)
apply to collective agreements as referred to in section  4 (1) no.  1 to no.  8. 
Section  7a 
Statutory instrument in cases und er section  4 (2) 
(1) At the joint request of the parties to a collective agreement within the meaning of section  
4 (2) and section  5, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, by way 
of a statutory instrument not requiring the approv al of the Bundesrat, that the provisions of 
that collective agreement apply to all employers and workers included in its scope of 
application and not bound by it if this appears necessary in the public interest in order to
achieve the legislative objective s under section  1 and, in particular, to counter predatory 
competition in respect of wage costs. Sentence  1 does not apply to collectively agreed 
working conditions under section  5 sentence  1 no.  1a. The Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs issues  a statutory instrument applicable to the care sector (section  10) in 
consultation with the Federal Ministry of Health without the approval of the Bundesrat. In the 
case of a statutory instrument issued in accordance with sentence  3, the conditions set out  in 
subsection  (1a) are also to be met and consideration is also to be given to the legislative 
objectives under section  11 (2). 
(1a) Before concluding a collective agreement as referred to in subsection  (1) which is 
applicable to the care sector, the Fede ral Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs gives notice, 
upon joint notification by the parties to the collective agreement, that negotiations on such a 
collective agreement have begun. Religious communities within whose remit commissions 
constituted on the  basis of parity which determine working conditions under canon law for 
the remit of church employers in the care sector have been established may, within three 
weeks following such notice, designate to the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs a 
commission established for its remit which is to be heard by the parties to the collective 
agreement in respect of the anticipated content of that collective agreement. The hearing is 
oral if the relevant commission or the parties to the collective agreemen t so request. The 
request as referred to in subsection  (1) requires the written consent of at least two of the 
commissions appointed in accordance with sentence  2. These commissions need to have 
been established within the remits of religious communities w ithin which a total at least two 
thirds of all workers employed in the care sector within the remits of religious communities 
are employed. A commission’s consent remedies any defects in connection with its hearing.  
(2) Section  7 (2) and (3) applies accord ingly.  
(3) Before issuing the statutory instrument, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives those employers and workers covered by the scope of application of that statutory
gives those employers and workers covered by the scope of application of that statutory 
instrument and those employers and workers possibly affected by it , the parties to the 
collective agreement, as well as any trade unions, employers’ associations and commissions 
constituted on the basis of parity which lay down working conditions under canon law for the 
remit of church employers which are interested in t he outcome of the process the opportunity 
to submit a written statement within three weeks, which period begins to run on the day of 
publication of the draft of the statutory instrument. The opportunity to submit a statement in 
particular also encompasses the question of whether the coverage of the provisions of the 
collective agreement is suited to achieving the legislative objectives under section  1 and, in 
particular, to countering predatory competition in respect of wage costs. If the statutory 
instrume nt is applicable to the care sector, the opportunity to submit a statement in particular 
also encompasses the issue of the extent to which the provisions of the collective agreement 
are suited to achieving the legislative objectives under section  11 (2). 
(4) If a request is made in accordance with subsection  (1), then after the expiry of the time 
limit under subsection  (3) the Committee as referred to in section  5 (1) sentence  1 of the 
Collective Agreements Act (Collective Agreements Committee) is involved.  If at least four of 
the members of the Committee vote for the application or the Committee does not submit a
Collective Agreements Act (Collective Agreements Committee) is involved.  If at least four of 
the members of the Committee vote for the application or the Committee does not submit a 
statement within a period of two months, then a statutory instrument may be issued in 
accordance with subsection  (1). If two or three of the membe rs of the Committee vote for the 
application, a statutory instrument can only be issued by the Federal Government.  
Section  8 
Employer’s obligation to guarantee working conditions  
(1) Employers established in Germany or abroad which are included in the scop e of 
application of a collective agreement as referred to in section  3 sentence  1 no.  1 which has 
been declared universally applicable or of a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7 or 
section  7a are oblig ated to guarantee their workers at least those working conditions which 
are prescribed under the collective agreement for their place of employment and to pay 
those contributions to a joint facility of the parties to the collective agreement which are due
under section  5 no.  3. Sentence  1 applies  regardless of whether the corresponding 
obligation exists by dint of coverage under section  3 of the Collective Agreements Act, by 
dint of declaration of general applicability under section  5 of the Collective Agreements Act 
or on the basis of a statutory  instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a. 
(2) Employers are obligated to comply with a collective agreement as referred to in section  3 
sentence  1 no.  1, to the extent that it sets out working conditions as referred to in section 5 
sentence  1 no. 2 to no.  4, as well as a collective agreement which, pursuant to a statutory 
instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a, extends to employers and workers not 
bound by it even if they are bound by another collective agreement under section  3 of the 
Collective Agreements Act or by dint of a declaration of general applicability under section  5 
of the Collective Agreements Act.  
(3) Where a temporary agency worker is employed by a user enterprise to carry out tasks 
which are covered by a collective  agreement as referred to in section  3 sentence  1 no.  1, to 
the extent that it sets out working conditions as referred to in section  5 sentence  1 no.  2 to 
no. 4, or by a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7 or section  7a, the temporary 
work age ncy is required to at least guarantee those working conditions which are prescribed 
under that collective agreement or statutory instrument and to pay the contributions due to 
the joint facility under that collective agreement; the same applies if the user  enterprise’s 
enterprise does not carry out the sector -specific activities to which that collective agreement 
or statutory instrument applies.  
Section  9 
Waiver, forfeiture  
Waiver of the workers’ entitlement under a statutory instrument as referred to in se ction  7 or 
section  7a to minimum pay rates in accordance with section  5 sentence  1 no.  1 is only 
permissible under a court settlement; in all other cases, such waiver is ruled out. Forfeiture
permissible under a court settlement; in all other cases, such waiver is ruled out. Forfeiture 
of the entitlement referred to in sentence  1 is ruled out. Exclu sion periods relating to the 
assertion of the entitlement referred to in sentence  1 may only be set out in the collective 
agreement on which the statutory instrument pursuant to section  7 or section  7a is based; 
the period must be at least six months.  
Division 4 
Working conditions in care sector  
Section  10 
Scope of application  
The provisions of this Division apply to the care sector. It encompasses enterprises and 
independent departments which predominantly provide outpatient, day -care or inpatient care 
services or outpatient nursing services for persons requiring nursing care (care enterprises). 
ʻPersons requiring nursing careʼ are persons with health -related impairments of their 
autonomy or capacities on account of which they are temporarily or permanently reliant on 
the help of others and are unable to independently compensate for or overcome ph ysical, 
cognitive or mental impairments or health -related stresses or demands. Facilities whose 
focus is on providing preventive healthcare services, medical rehabilitation services, services 
relating to participation in working life or life in the communi ty, schooling or the education of 
sick or disabled persons, as well as hospitals are not ʻcare enterprisesʼ within the meaning of 
sentence  2. 
Section  11 
Statutory instrument  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may determine, by way of a statutory 
instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, that the working conditi ons under 
section  5 no.  1 and no.  2 proposed by the commission established in accordance with 
section  12 apply to all employers and workers covered by a recommendation as referred to 
in section  12a (2).
(2) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs  is required, when taking its decision in 
accordance with subsection  (1), to give consideration to the legislative objectives under 
section  1, to ensuring the quality of care services and to the mandate of church and other 
social welfare organisations purs uant to section  11 (2) of Book Eleven of the Social Code 
(Sozialgesetzbuch XI ). 
(3) Before issuing a statutory instrument, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
gives the employers and workers covered by the scope of application of the statutor y 
instrument, the parties to collective agreements which at least in part cover the sector -
specific activities to which the statutory instrument applies, as well as commissions 
constituted on the basis of parity which lay down working conditions under cano n law for the 
remit of church employers in the care sector the opportunity to submit a written statement 
within three weeks, which period begins to run on the day of publication of the draft of the 
statutory instrument.  
Section  12 
Appointment of Commission  
(1) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs appoints a Standing Commission which 
takes decisions relating to recommendations on laying down working conditions in 
accordance with section  12a (2). 
(2) The Commission is appointed for a five -year pe riod. The Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs may extend the period of the appointment if the Commission has already 
begun discussions on new recommendations but has not yet adopted a resolution on those 
recommendations. In such cases, the new Co mmission is appointed immediately after such 
resolution is adopted, though no later than three months following the expiry of its five -year 
appointment.  
(3) The Commission comprises eight members. The members of the Commission perform 
their tasks on a n hon orary  basis. They are not bound by instructions.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs appoints eight suitable persons as 
ordinary members as well as eight suitable persons as their deputies, taking account of 
proposals made by bodies entit led to make proposals. ʻBodies entitled to make proposalsʼ 
are
proposals made by bodies entit led to make proposals. ʻBodies entitled to make proposalsʼ 
are 
1. parties to collective agreements in the care sector, whereby  
a) trade unions or trade union federations responsible for collective bargaining 
in the care sector,  
b) employers’ associations or federations of employ ers’ associations 
responsible for collective bargaining in the care sector  
are each entitled to propose two ordinary members and two deputies and  
2. the employees’ side and the employers’ side of commissions constituted on the 
basis of parity which lay dow n working conditions under canon law for the remit of church 
employers in the care sector, whereby  
a) the employees’ side and  
b) the employers’ side  
are each entitled to propose two ordinary members and two deputies.  
Bodies entitled to make proposals which  belong to the same groups as referred to in 
sentence  2 no.  1 (a) to no.  2 (b) may make joint proposals.  
(5) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs issues a call for proposals within a time 
limit which it is to determine. No account is to be tak en of any proposals received following 
the expiry of the time limit. The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs reviews the 
proposals and may require that facts relevant to the review be submitted and credibly
substantiated within a time limit which  it is to determine. No account is to be taken of any 
facts submitted and credibly substantiated following the expiry of the time limit.  
(6) If the number of proposals submitted exceeds the number of seats on the Commission 
accorded to one of the groups re ferred to in subsection  (4) sentence  2, it is for the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs to decide which proposals are to be followed. The 
following is to be taken into consideration when taking this decision:  
1. in the case of several proposals  made by trade unions or trade union 
federations responsible for collective bargaining in the care sector: their representativity,  
2. in the case of several proposals made by employers’ associations or 
federations of employers’ associations responsible for  collective bargaining in the care 
sector: the mapping of the diversity of charitable, public and private organisations as well 
as, in equal measure, the representativity of the respective association or federation.  
The representativity of a trade union or  trade union federation is assessed on the basis of 
the number of members of the respective trade union or trade union federation employed as 
workers in the care sector and of the trade unions which are members of that federation. The 
representativity of a n employers’ association is assessed on the basis of the number of 
workers employed in the care sector whose employers are members of the respective 
employers’ association and may be bound by collective agreement depending on their type 
of membership. The representativity of a federation of employers’ associations is assessed 
on the basis of the number of workers employed in the care sector whose employers  
1. are members of the federation and may be bound by collective agreement 
depending on their type of m embership, or  
2. are members of employers’ associations which are members of that federation 
and may be bound by collective agreement depending on their type of membership and 
membership of the respective employers’ association.  
Where joint proposals are s ubmitted as per subsection  (4) sentence  3, the relevant numbers 
of workers assigned to the bodies entitled to make proposals are to be added together.
of workers assigned to the bodies entitled to make proposals are to be added together.  
(7) If an ordinary member or a deputy retires from the Commission, the Federal Ministry of 
Labour and Soc ial Affairs appoints another suitable person. If, when appointing that retired 
ordinary member or deputy, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs followed a 
proposal made by a body entitled to make proposals or, if in the case of a joint proposal  
having been made as per subsection  (4) sentence  3, it followed a proposal made by bodies 
entitled to make proposals, the new appointment is also made taking account of the proposal 
made. If the body or bodies do not propose a suitable person within a suit able time limit to be 
determined by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the decision on the 
appointment is taken by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. Subsection  (5) 
sentence  3 and sentence  4 applies accordingly.  
(8) Actions against the appointment of members by the Federal Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs do not have suspensive effect.  
Section  12a 
Recommendations on working conditions  
(1) The Commission begins discussions upon application by a body entitled to make 
propo sals pursuant to section  12 (4) sentence  2. If the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social 
Affairs has given notice that negotiations have begun concerning a collective agreement 
within the meaning of section  7a (1a) sentence  1, then three quarters of the me mbers of 
those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  2 (a) and (b) may jointly call for
within the meaning of section  7a (1a) sentence  1, then three quarters of the me mbers of 
those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  2 (a) and (b) may jointly call for 
discussions on new recommendations to begin or to continue no earlier than four months 
following expiry of the time limit for the appointment of commissio ns pursuant to section  7a 
(1a) sentence  2.
(2) The Commission adopts recommendations on laying down working conditions as set out 
in section  5 sentence  1 no.  1 or no.  2. In doing so, the Commission takes account of the 
objectives under section  1 and sectio n 11 (2). Recommended minimum pay rates are 
generally to be differentiated by type of task performed by workers or their qualifications. 
Recommendations are generally to apply for a period of at least 24 months. The 
Commission may recommend an exclusion pe riod which meets the requirements of section  
9 sentence  3. Reasons for the recommendations are to be given in writing.  
(3) The Commission adopts a resolution if at least three quarters of the members  
1. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentenc e 2 no.  1 (a) and (b),  
2. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  2 (a) and (b),  
3. of those groups referred to in section 12  (4) sentence  2 no.  1 (a) and no.  2 (a), 
and 
4. of those groups referred to in section  12 (4) sentence  2 no.  1 (b) and no.  2 (b) 
are present and in favour. Ordinary members may be represented by their respective 
deputies.  
(4) The meetings of the Commission are chaired by an authorised representative of the 
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, who does no t have voting rights. The meetings 
are not public. The substance of the discussions is confidential. The Commission regularly 
calls in a representative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and of the 
Federal Ministry of Health, who has no v oting rights, to participate in its meetings. Further 
details are to be set out in the Commission’s Rules of Procedure.  
(5) Participation in meetings of the Commission as well as the adoption of resolutions may, 
in justified exceptional cases, take place b y means of a video conference or telephone 
conference if  
1. no member of the Commission immediately objects to this procedure,  
2. the representative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs does not
2. the representative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs does not 
immediately object to this procedure and  
3. it is ensured that third parties will have no knowledge of the content of the 
meeting.  
Section  13 
Legal consequences  
The regulations of a statutory instrument as referred to in section  7a take precedence over 
the regulations of a statutory instrument as ref erred to in section  11 to the extent that the 
scopes of application of those statutory instruments overlap. Notwithstanding sentence  1, a 
statutory instrument as referred to in section  11 is equal to a statutory instrument as referred 
to in section  7 as re gards the application of sections  8 and 9 as well as of Divisions  5 and 6.  
Division  4a 
Working conditions in trade in cross -border transport of euro cash  
Section  13a 
Equal status  
Regulation (EU) No  1214/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of  16 
November 2011 on the professional cross -border transport of euro cash by road between 
euro-area Member States (OJ L 316, 29.11.2011, p.  1) is equal to a statutory instrument as 
referred to in section  7 as regards the application of sections  8 and 9 as well as of Divisions  
5 and 6.
Division  4b 
Additional working conditions for workers employed in Germany for more than 12  
months by employers established abroad  
Section  13b 
Additional working conditions  
(1) If a worker is employed in Germany for more than 1 2 months by an employer established 
abroad, then after the 12 -month period of employment in Germany not only the working 
conditions under Divisions  2 to 4a apply to the employment relationship but also all those 
working conditions which are prescribed, at the place of employment, under legal and 
administrative provisions and under collective agreements with general applicability, though 
not 
1. procedures, formalities and conditions relating to the conclusion or termination 
of the employment relationship, in cluding post -contractual non -competition clauses, and  
2. occupational pension schemes.  
Section  2 (2) applies accordingly.  
(2) If the employer submits notification before the expiry of a 12 -month period of employment 
in Germany, then the period after the ex piry of which the additional working conditions as 
referred to subsection  (1) apply to the workers concerned is extended to 18  months. 
Notification must be made in text form as per section  126b of the Civil Code ( Bürgerliches 
Gesetzbuch ) in German to the c ompetent customs authority and must contain the following 
particulars:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of the workers,  
2. the place of employment in Germany, in the case of building services the 
building site,  
3. the reasons for exceeding  the 12 -month period of employment in Germany, and  
4. the duration of the employment in Germany as anticipated at the point at which 
notification is made.  
The competent customs authority confirms receipt of such notification.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Fi nance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat,  
1. that, in which manner and under which technical and organisational conditions
the Bundesrat,  
1. that, in which manner and under which technical and organisational conditions 
notification may, in derogation from subsection  (2) sentence  2, only be made in electronic 
form,  
2. in which manner receipt of notification by the competent authority referred to in 
subsection  (2) sentence  3 may be confirmed.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finan ce may determine the competent authority referred to in 
subsection  (2) by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat.  
Section  13c 
Calculating period of employment in Germany  
(1) Where workers are employed in Germany under con tracts for work or services, account 
is taken, when calculating the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in 
which they are employed under those contracts in Germany.  
(2) Where workers are employed in one of their employer’s enterprises in Germany or in a 
company affiliated to their employer in accordance with section  15 of the Stock Corporation 
Act (Aktiengesetz ) in Germany, account is taken, when calculating the period of employment
in Germany, of all those periods in which they are employ ed in the enterprise in Germany or 
in the affiliated company in Germany.  
(3) Where the employer established abroad, in the capacity as temporary work agency, 
temporarily supplies a temporary agency worker to a user enterprise in Germany, account is 
taken, when calculating the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in which 
the temporary agency worker is employed in Germany under the supply contract. Where a 
user enterprise established abroad employs a temporary agency worker in Germany, 
subse ctions  (1) and (2) apply accordingly.  
(4) Any interruption of a worker’s or temporary agency worker’s activity in Germany is not 
regarded as termination of the employment in Germany when calculating the period of 
employment in Germany. No account is taken,  when calculating the period of employment, 
of any periods in which the essential obligations of the parties to the employment contract 
rest or in which a person is employed abroad.  
(5) Where workers were employed in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3) and that 
employment continues in Germany in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3) immediately 
following such a period of employment, the two periods are added together when calculating 
the period of employment in Germany.  
(6) Where workers are emp loyed in Germany and their employment does not constitute 
employment in accordance with subsection  (1), (2) or (3), account is taken, when calculating 
the period of employment in Germany, of all those periods in which they are employed 
without interruption  in Germany.  
(7) Where an employer or the user enterprise established abroad as referred to in subsection  
(3) sentence  2 replaces a worker employed in Germany with another worker who performs 
the same tasks at the same place, the period of employment of th e replaced worker is added 
to the period of employment of the replacing worker. A task is ʻthe same taskʼ within the 
meaning of sentence  1 if a worker essentially performs the same activities  as the worker 
whom he or she replaces and if these activities  
1. are performed under the same contracts for work or services,
whom he or she replaces and if these activities  
1. are performed under the same contracts for work or services,  
2. are, in the case of tasks performed in one of the employer’s enterprises or 
affiliated companies, performed in the same enterprise or affiliated company in Germany, 
or 
3. are performed in the  capacity as a temporary agency worker for the same user 
enterprise established in Germany.  
A worker performs the task ʻat the same placeʼ within the meaning of sentence  1 if he or she  
1. performs the task at the same address or in the immediate vicinity of the same 
address as the worker whom he or she is replacing, or  
2. performs the task at other addresses as set out in those contracts for work or 
services under the same contracts for work or services as the worker whom he or she is 
replacing.  
(8) Where a worker is employed by an employer established in another Member State of the 
European Union or the European Economic A rea as a driver or co -driver (driver) as referred 
to in section 36  (1) in Germany, for the purposes of calculating the period of employment in 
Germany, the periods of this employment  
1. in derogation from subsection (5) are not added together with  the peri ods of an 
employment in  Germany that immediately follows,  
2. in derogation from subsection (7) are not added together with the periods of 
employment of the driver replaced .
Division  5 
Enforcement under civil law  
Section  14 
Employer’s liability  
An entrepren eur who contracts another entrepreneur with the performance of work or the 
provision of services is liable for the obligations of that entrepreneur, of a subcontractor or of 
a temporary work agency contracted by the entrepreneur or subcontractor as regards  
payment of the minimum pay to workers or of contributions to a joint facility of the parties to a 
collective agreement under section  8 as a surety who has waived the defence of failure to 
pursue remedies. ʻMinimum payʼ within the meaning of sentence  1 onl y encompasses that 
amount which is to be paid to workers after deduction of taxes and contributions paid 
towards social security and the promotion of employment or corresponding social security 
expenses (net pay).  
Section  15 
Legal venue  
Workers who are or were employed within the area of application of this Act by employers 
established abroad may also file an action in respect of their period of employment within the 
area of application of this Act for the fulfilment of obligations under section  2, 8, 13b o r 14 
before a German court with jurisdiction in employment matters. This option is also available 
to a joint facility of the parties to a collective agreement in accordance with section  5 
sentence  1 no.  3 in respect of the contributions due to it.  
Section  15a 
User enterprise’s information requirements as regards temporary workers posted 
across borders  
(1) Before a user enterprise established abroad employs a temporary agency worker in 
Germany, it informs the temporary work agency thereof in text form as per  section  126b of 
the Civil Code.  
(2) Before a user enterprise established in Germany or abroad employs a temporary agency 
worker hired by a temporary work agency established abroad in Germany, the user 
enterprise informs the temporary work agency in text f orm as per section  126b of the Civil 
Code about the essential working conditions which apply in the user enterprise’s enterprise 
to the user enterprise’s comparable workers, including remuneration. The information 
requirement does not apply if the precondi tions for deviating from the principle of equality
requirement does not apply if the precondi tions for deviating from the principle of equality 
under section  8 (2) and (4) sentence  2 of the Act on Temporary Agency Work 
(Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz ) are met. Section  13 of the Act on Temporary Agency 
Work remains unaffected.  
Division  6 
Control an d enforcement by governmental agencies  
Section  16 
Competence  
The customs authorities are responsible for examining whether an employer is complying 
with the obligations under section  8, insofar as these relate to the guarantee of working 
conditions under s ection  5 sentence  1 no.  1 to no.  4. 
Section  17 
Powers of customs authorities and other authorities  
Sections  2 to 6, 14, 15, 20, 22 and 23 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful 
Employment ( Schwarzarbeitsbekämpfungsgesetz ) apply accordingly, with  the proviso that  
1. the authorities referred to therein are also permitted to inspect employment 
contracts, records made in accordance with section  2 of the Act on Proof of the Existence 
of an Employment Relationship ( Nachweisgesetz ) and other business do cuments which
indirectly or directly provide information about compliance with the working conditions in 
accordance with section  8, 
2. those required to cooperate in accordance with section  5 (1) of the Act to 
Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment  are required to submit these 
documents, and  
3. the customs authorities are authorised, where there is an imminent danger to 
public security and order, to enter accommodation provided to workers by an employer at 
any time of day or night in order to examin e whether the working conditions under section  
5 sentence  1 no.  4 are being complied with.  
Sections  16 to 19 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment apply. 
Section  6 (4) of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment appl ies 
accordingly. Section  67 (3) no.  4 of Book Ten of the Social Code ( Sozialgesetzbuch X ) does 
not apply to data processing which serves the purpose referred to in section  16 or 
cooperation with authorities in the European Economic Area pursuant to section  20 (2). The 
basic right to inviolability of the home (Article 13 of the Basic Law ( Grundgesetz )) is 
restricted on account of sentence  1 no.  3. 
Section  18 
Notification requirement  
(1) Where working conditions apply to an employment relationship whose compl iance is 
controlled by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, an employer established 
abroad who employs a worker or several workers within the area of application of this Act is 
required, before the start of each work or service, to submit writte n notification in German to 
the competent customs authority which contains all the particulars which are essential for the 
audit. The following particulars are ʻessentialʼ:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of those workers employed by 
the employer within the area of application of this Act,  
2. the start and anticipated duration of the employment,  
3. the place of employment, in the case of building services the building site,  
4. the place in Germany where the documents as required under sect ion 19 are
4. the place in Germany where the documents as required under sect ion 19 are 
kept available,  
5. the family name, given names, date of birth and address in Germany of the 
person responsible,  
6. the sector in which the workers are to be posted, and  
7. the family name, given names and address in Germany of an authorised 
recipient, unless such person is identical to the person responsible referred to in no.  5. 
The employer referred to in sentence  1 is required immediately to notify any changes to 
these particulars.  
(2) In derogation from subsection (1), an employer establishe d in another Member State of 
the European Union or the European Economic Area is required before the employment of a 
driver for the provision of transport services for goods or passengers in Germany as referred 
to in section 36  (1) starts to transmit to th e competent customs authority a notification in 
electronic form which contains the following particulars:  
1. the identity of the operator , where this is available in the fo rm of the number of 
the C ommun ity licence , 
2. the family name and given name as well  as address in the State of 
establishment of an authorised recipient ,
3. the family name, given name, date of birth, address and the number of the 
driving licence of the driver,  
4. the s tart date of the driver’s contract  of employment  and the law applicabl e to it , 
5. the anticipated start and end dates of the driver’s employment in Germany,  
6. the number plates  of the motor vehicles to be used for the employment in 
Germany,  
7. whether the transport services to be performed  by the driver are the carriage of 
goods or passengers and international carriage or cabotage operations;  
the notification must be transmitted using the electronic interface of the Internal Market 
Information System within the meaning of Article 1 in conjunction with Article 5  (a) of 
Regula tion (EU) No 1024/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 
2012 on administrative cooperation through the Internal Market Information System and 
repealing Commission Decision 2008/49/EC (‘the IMI Regulation’) (OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 
1) as last amended by Regulation (EU) 2020/1055 (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 17). Subsection 
(1) sentence 3 applies accordingly.  
(3) Where a temporary work agency established abroad temporarily supplies a worker or 
several workers to perform work for a user  enterprise, th e temporary work agency  is 
required, under the conditions of subsection  (1) sentence  1, to transmit  written notification in 
German to the competent customs authority before the start of each work or service which 
contains the following parti culars:  
1. the family name, given names and date of birth of the workers who are being 
temporarily supplied,  
2. the start and duration of the posting,  
3. the place of employment, in the case of building services the building site,  
4. the place in Germany w here the documents as required under section  19 are 
kept available,  
5. the family name, given names and address in Germany of an authorised 
recipient for the temporary work agency,
5. the family name, given names and address in Germany of an authorised 
recipient for the temporary work agency,  
6. the sector in which the workers are to be posted, and  
7. the family name , given names or company name, as well as the address of the 
user enterprise . 
Subsection  (1) sentence  3 applies accordingly.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat,  
1. that, in which manner and under which technical and organisational conditions 
notification, a notification of changes and an assurance may, in derogation from 
subsection  (1) sentence  1 and sentence  3, subsection  (2) and subsection  (3) sentence  1 
and sentence  2, and subsection  (4), be submitted in electronic form,  
2. under which conditions no notification of changes need be made by way of 
exception, and  
3. how the notification procedur e can be simplified or modified insofar as the 
posted workers are employed in the context of regularly recurring work or services or 
other specific features of the work to be performed or the services to be provided so 
require.
(5) The Federal Ministry of Finance may determine the competent authority as referred to in 
subsection  (1) sentence  1 and subsection  (3) sentence  1 by way of a statutory instrument 
not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat.  
Section  19 
Preparation and keeping available of documents  
(1) Where working conditions apply to an employment relationship whose compliance is 
controlled by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, the employer is required to 
record the start, end and length of a worker’s daily working time and, insofar as  hourly 
allowances are to be paid, the start, end and length of the working time which establishes an 
entitlement to the allowance, including information regarding the relevant allowance, and to 
do so no later than the end of the seventh calendar day follo wing the day on which the work 
was performed, and to retain these records for at least two years from the effective date 
applicable to the record. Sentence  1 applies accordingly to a user enterprise to which a 
temporary work agency temporarily supplies a w orker or several workers to perform work.  
(2) Each employer is required to keep available, in Germany and in German, those 
documents which are required for the monitoring of those working conditions whose 
compliance is monitored by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16 for the entire 
duration of the workers’ actual employment within the area of application of this Act, at least 
for the duration of the entire work or service, but no longer than two years overall. Upon the 
request of the audit author ity, the documents are also to be kept available at the place of 
employment, in the case of building services on the building site.  
(2a) In derogation from subsection (2), an employer established in another Member State of 
the European Union or the Europea n Economic Area must ensure that the driver employed 
to provide transport services for goods or passengers in Germany as referred to in section 
36 (1) has at his or her disposal the following documents in paper or electronic form:  
1. a copy of the notifica tion transmitted in compliance with section 18  (2), 
2. evidence of the transport operations, in particular electronic consignment notes
2. evidence of the transport operations, in particular electronic consignment notes 
or the evidence mentioned  in Article 8  (3) of Regulation (EC) No  1072/2009 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council  of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access 
to the in ternational road haulage market  (OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 72) , as last amended 
by Regulation (EU) 2020/1055 (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 17) , and 
3. all tachograph  records and  in particular the country sy mbols  mentioned in 
Article 34  (6) (f) and (7) of Regulation (EU) No  165/2014 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 4 February 2014 on tachographs in road transport, repealing Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 3821/85 on recording equipment in road tra nsport and amending 
Regulation (EC) No 561/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the 
harmonisation of certain social legislation relating to road transport  (OJ L 60, 28.2.2014, 
p. 1), as last amen ded by Regulation (EU) 2020/1054  (OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 1) , of the 
Member States in which the driver was present  when carrying out international road 
transport operations or cabotage operations or the recordings as referred to in section 1  
(6) sentences 1 and 2 of the Vehicle Crew Ordinance ( Fahrp ersonalverordnung ) of 27 
June 2005  (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  1882), as last amended by Article 1 of the 
Ordinance of 8 August 2017  (Federal Law Gazette I, p.  3158).  
Where employed in Germany as referred to in section 36  (1), the driver must keep the 
docum ents placed at his or her disposal in accordance with sentence 1 and produce them to
Where employed in Germany as referred to in section 36  (1), the driver must keep the 
docum ents placed at his or her disposal in accordance with sentence 1 and produce them to 
the customs authorities on request in paper or electronic form; if not employed in Germany 
as referred to in section 36  (1), the obligation under the first half -sentence a pplies only in the 
framework of a roadside check in respect of the documents as referred to in sentence 1 nos. 
2 and 3.  
(2b) After the employment period in Germany of a driver as referred to in section 36  (1) has 
ended, the employer established in another Member State of the European Union or the
European Economic Area must on request send to the customs authorities via the electronic 
interface connected to the Internal Market Information System the following documents 
within eight weeks from the date of th e request:  
1. copies of the documents as required by subsec tion (2a) sentence 1 nos. 2 and  
3, 
2. documentation relating to the remuneration of the driver including proof of 
payments , 
3. the employment contract or an equivalent document within the meaning o f 
Article 3  (1) of Council Directive 91/533/EEC of 14 October 1991 on an employer's 
obligation to inform employees of the conditions applicable to the contract or employment 
relationship  (OJ L 288, 18.10.1991, p. 32) and  
4. time-recording docum entation rel ating to the driver’ s work, in particular 
tachograph records.  
The customs authorities may request the documents as referred to in sentence 1 only for 
such period of employment as referred to in section 36  (1) which at the date of the request 
has ended.  
If, notwithstanding employment in Germany within the meaning of section 36  (1), a 
notification as required by section 18  (2) was not transmitted, the employer established in 
another Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area must on 
request send to the customs authorities the documents as referred to in sentence 1, outside 
of the electronic interface connected to the Internal Market Information System, in paper or 
electronic form.  
(3) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may,  by way of a statutory instrument 
not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat, restrict the employer’s , the temporary work 
agency’s  or a user enterprise’s obligations under section  18 and subsections  (1) and (2) in 
respect of individual sectors or groups o f workers.  
(4) The Federal Ministry of Finance may, in consultation with the Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs, determine, by way of a statutory instrument not requiring the approval of 
the Bundesrat, how the employer’s obligation to record the  actual and allowance -related
the Bundesrat, how the employer’s obligation to record the  actual and allowance -related 
working time of those workers whom that employer employs and to retain those records can 
may be simplified or modified insofar as the specific features of the work to be performed or 
service to be provided or the specific feat ures of the sector so require.  
Section  20 
Cooperation between domestic and foreign authorities  
(1) The customs authorities notify the competent local Land  financial authorities of 
notifications submitted in accordance with section  18 (1) and (3).  The Land  financial 
authorities may access using the Internal Market Information System information related to 
the notifications submitted in accordance with section 18  (2). 
(2) The customs authorities and other authorities referred to in section  2 of the Act to 
Com bat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment may, in accordance with data 
protection regulations, also cooperate with authorities in other Contracting States to the 
Agreement on the European Economic Area which are responsible for carrying out tasks 
corresp onding to those under this Act or for combating illegal employment or which can 
provide information about whether an employer is fulfilling the obligations under section  8. 
Rules governing international mutual assistance in criminal matters remain unaffect ed 
thereby.  
(3) The customs authorities notify the Central Trade and Industry Register of any decisions 
on regulatory fines in accordance with section  23 (1) to (3) once they have become final if 
the fine amounts to more than 200  euros.  
(4) (repealed)
Sect ion 21 
Exclusion from public procurement procedures  
(1) Applicants on whom a fine of at least 2,500 euros has been imposed on account of a 
breach of section 23  (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2) are generally to be excluded from 
participating in a tender for a delivery, construction or service contract of one of the 
contracting authorities referred to in sections  99 and 100 of the Act against Restraints of 
Competition ( Gesetz gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen ) for an appropriate period until 
their reliability has been proven to be re -established. The same applies even before 
regulatory fines proceedings are conducted where, in an individual case, the body of 
evidence leaves no reasonable doubt as to serious misconduct within the meaning of 
sentence  1. 
(2) The autho rities responsible for prosecuting or punishing the regulatory offences referred 
to in section  23 (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2)  may, upon request, provide the information 
required to the public contracting authorities referred to in section  99 of the Act a gainst 
Restraints of Competition and to those agencies which keep pre -qualification directories or 
directories of entrepreneurs and suppliers admitted by public contracting authorities.  
(3) Within the framework of their activities, the public contracting a uthorities referred to in 
subsection  (2) request information from the Competition  Register regarding final decisions 
on regulatory fines imposed on account of one of the regulatory offences referred to in 
section  23 (1) nos. 1 to 9 and 11 or (2) or request  applicants to make a declaration stating 
that the conditions for exclusion referred to in subsection  (1) are not met. Where an applicant 
makes a declaration, the public contracting authorities referred to in subsection  (2) may at 
any time request addition al information from the Competition  Register.  
(4) In the case of contracts worth more than 30,000  euros, a public contracting authority as 
referred to in subsection  (2) requests information from the Competition  Register concerning 
the applicant who is to b e awarded the contract.
the applicant who is to b e awarded the contract.  
(5) Applicants are to be heard before a decision is taken on their exclusion.  
Section  22 
(repealed)  
Section  23 
Regulatory fines provisions  
(1) Whoever intentionally or negligently,  
1. contrary to section  8 (1) sentence  1 or (3), doe s not guarantee a working 
condition whose compliance is checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  
16, or does not do so in good time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in 
good time,  
2. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conju nction with section  5 (1) sentence  1 
no. 1 or no.  3 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not 
acquiesce to or does not cooperate with an audit,  
3. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conjunction with section  5 (1) sentence  1 
no. 2 of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not 
acquiesce to entry into property or business premises,  
4. contrary to section  17 sentence  1, in conjunction with section  5 (5) sentence  1 
of the Act to Combat Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment, does not transmit 
data, does not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time,  
5. contrary to section  18 (1) sentence  1, (2) sentence 1  or (3) sentence  1, does not 
submit notification, does not do so correctly, in  full, in the prescribed manner or in good 
time, or does not transmit  notification, does not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed 
manner or in good time,
6. contrary to section  18 (1) sentence  3, also in conjunction with (2) sentence 2 or 
(3) senten ce 2, does not give notification of changes, does not do so correctly, in full, in 
the prescribed manner or in good time,  
7. contrary to section  19 (1) sentence  1, also in conjunction with sentence  2, does 
not prepare records, does not do so correctly, in full or in good time, or does not retain 
them or does not do so for at least two years,  
8. contrary to section  19 (2), does not keep available a document, does not do so 
correctly, in full or in the prescribed manner,  
9. contrary to section 19  (2a) sentenc e 1, does not ensure that the documents 
mentioned therein are available,  
10. contrary to section 19  (2a) sentence 2, does not produce a document, does not 
do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time, or  
11. contrary to section 19  (2b) sentence 1 or 3, does not submit a document, does 
not do so correctly, in full, in the prescribed manner or in good time,  
is deemed to have committed a regulatory offence.  
(2) Whoever has a significant amount of work performed or services provided by con tracting, 
in the capacity as entrepreneur, another entrepreneur and knows or negligently does not 
know that that entrepreneur, in fulfilling that contract,  
1. contrary to section  8 (1) sentence  1 or (3), does not guarantee a working 
condition whose complia nce is checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  
16, does not do so in good time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in good 
time, or  
2. uses a subcontractor or permits a subcontractor to act who, contrary to section  
8 (1) senten ce 1 or (3), does not guarantee a working condition whose compliance is 
checked by the customs authorities pursuant to section  16, or does not do so in good 
time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in good time,
time, or does not pay a contribution or does not do so in good time,  
is deemed to have committed a regulatory offence.  
(3) In the cases referred to in subsection  (1) no.  1 and subsection  (2), a fine of up to 500,000  
euros, in all other cases a fine of up to 30,000  euros, may be imposed for the regulatory 
offence.  
(4) ʻAdministrative authoritiesʼ within the meaning of section  36 (1) no.  1 of the Act on 
Regulatory Offences ( Gesetz über Ordnungswidrigkeiten ) are those authorities referred to in 
section  16, each in respect of their remit.  
(5) The Federal Administrative Enforcement Act ( Verwaltungs -Vollstreck ungsgesetz des 
Bundes ) applies to enforcement, by the authorities referred to in section  16, in favour of 
federal authorities and legal entities under public law directly under Federal Government 
control, as well as to enforcement, by the authorities refer red to in section  16, of asset 
seizure in accordance with section  111e of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Strafprozeßordnung ) in conjunction with section  46 of the Act on Regulatory Offences.  
Division 7  
Cross -border enforcement  
Section 24  
Scope  
This Divisi on governs the handling of requests from or to another Member State of the 
European Union or the European Economic Area in accordance with Chapter VI of Directive 
2014/67/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the 
enforcement of  Directive 96/71/EC concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the 
provision of services and amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012 on administrative
cooperation through the Internal Market Information System (‘the IMI Regulation’) (OJ L 159, 
28.5.2014, p. 11) for  
1. the service of documents or the enforcement of financial administrative 
penalties or fines including fees and surcharges imposed on an employer established in 
Germany for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of w orkers from  
one Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area to another 
Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area (incoming 
requests),  
2. the service of documents or the enforcement of fines imposed on an employer  
established in another Member State of the European Union or the European Economic 
Area for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of workers in Germany  
(outgoing requests).  
Rules on the handling of requests for the service of document s or the enforcement of 
financial administrative penalties or fines set out in other laws or international agreements 
take precedence.  
Section 25  
Competence  
(1) The central authority for the purposes of this Division is the Federal Office for 
Enforcement b y Customs in the Main Customs Office Hannover.  
(2) The competent authorities for service and enforcement in Germany (enforcement 
authorities) for the purposes of this Division are in relation to incoming requests the 
authorities that are competent in accor dance with section 23  (4). In relation to outgoing 
requests the prevailing competence applies.  
(3) The central authority and the enforcement authorities must provide each other without 
delay with the information necessary for the processing of incoming and  outgoing requests.  
Section 26  
Internal Market Information System  
For the cross -border processing of incoming and outgoing requests the central authority 
uses the Internal Market Information System established under Regulation (EU) No 
1024/2012.  
Section 27  
Content of outgoing requests  
Outgoing requests must include at least the following particulars:  
1. the name and known address of the enforcement debtor or addressee and 
further data to the extent necessary for the identification of the enforcement debtor or 
addressee,
further data to the extent necessary for the identification of the enforcement debtor or 
addressee,  
2. a summary of the facts and circumstances of the infringement, the nature of the 
offence and the relevant applicable rules,  
3. the decision  to be enforced , the service or enforcement of which is requested, in 
the original or a certified cop y thereof and all other relevant information or documents, 
including those of a judicial nature, concerning the underlying fine,  
4. the name, address and other contact details  
a) regarding the competent au thority responsible for the fining decision  and 
b) the competent body where further information can be obtained concerning 
the fine or the possibilities for contesting the payment obligation or decision 
imposing it, if this body is different to the authority mentioned in letter (a),
5. in the case of a req uest for the service of documents, the purpose of the service 
and the period within which it must be effected,  
6. in the case of a request for the enforcement of an administrative penalty or fine  
a) the date when the decision has become  final,  
b) an indica tion of the nature and amount of the administrative penalty or fine,  
c) any dates relevant to the enforcement process, including whether, and if so 
how, the decision was served on the person or persons concerned and whether 
the decision was given in defaul t of appearance,  
d) a confirmation from the requesting authority that the administrative penalty or 
fine is not subject to any further appeal, and  
e) the underlying claim in respect of which the request is made and its different 
components.  
Section 28  
Hand ling of outgoing requests  
(1) Outgoing requests are drawn up by the enforcement authority after verifying that the 
requirements as referred to in subsections (2) and (3) are fulfilled. They are forwarded by the 
central authority to the competent authority of another Member State of the European Union 
or the European Economic Area.  
(2) The competent authority of another Member State of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area may be requested to serve any documents that are necessary for 
the determin ation of a fine for failure to comply with the applicable rules on the posting of 
workers in Germany or the enforcement thereof. A request for service as referred to in 
sentence 1 may only be made if the German enforcement authority itself is unable to ser ve 
the relevant document.  
(3) The competent authority of another Member State of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area may be requested to enforce a fine for failure to comply with the 
applicable rules on the posting of workers in Germany where  
1. the requirements for enf orcement in Germany would be satisfied , 
2. enforcement in Germany is not possible and  
3. the fine to be enforced has not been challenged or is no longer subject to 
challenge.  
(4) The central authority notifies without delay the c ompetent authority of another Member
challenge.  
(4) The central authority notifies without delay the c ompetent authority of another Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area where  
1. a request for an extraordinary remedy is filed  challenging the fining decision to 
be enf orced or in relation to the fining  procedure that has become fin al by virtue of the 
decision or  
2. the German enforcement authority amends or withdraws the outgoing request.  
(5) Where a request for enforcement has been made to the competent authority of another 
Member State of the European Union or the European Economi c Area, enforcement in 
Germany is no longer permitted unless the request has been withdrawn or the requested 
authority has refused the enforcement.  
Section 29  
Handling of incoming requests  
(1) The central authority forwards incoming requests without delay to the enforcement 
authority. The central authority notifies the requesting authority without delay on each
occasion when one of the measures mentioned in subsections (2) to (4) has been executed. 
The notification must include in particular the date of any  service effected in accordance with 
subsection (3).  
(2) The enforcement authority takes the measures necessary for the service or enforcement 
of the request forwarded in accordance with subsection (1) sentence 1 and notifies the 
central authority of this on each occasion without delay. The decision imposing a financial 
administrative penalty or fine, the service or enforcement of which is requested, must be 
served and enforced in the same way as a fining decision taken by a public authority as 
referred to in section 23  (1) to (3). The Federal Republic of Germany waives in relation to the 
requesting Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area any 
entitlement to the reimbursement of the costs for the assistance in service and enforcement 
provided in accordance with this Act.  
(3) The enforcement authority takes without delay and at the latest within one month of 
receipt of the request by the central authority all measures necessary to serve on the 
employer established in Germany all the doc uments connected with a decision imposing a 
financial administrative penalty or fine or the enforcement thereof.  
(4) Where it comes to the enforcement authority’s attention that in the requesting Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area a request for an extraordinary 
remedy has been filed by the employer concerned or by an interested party challenging the 
decision to be enforced or in relation to the fining procedure that has become final by virtue 
of the decision, the enforcement au thority suspends the enforcement procedure pending the 
decision in relation to the extraordinary remedy.  
(5) Claims are enforced in euros. Where a different currency is the basis for the financial 
administrative penalty or fine, the exchange rate of the Eu ropean Central Bank applicable on 
the date that the financial administrative penalty or fine was determined is decisive. The 
enforcement proceeds are credited to the Federal Cash Office where a Federal authority 
acts as enforcement authority, otherwise to the Land  cash office concerned.  
(6) Appeals challenging the service or enforcement of a financial administrative penalty or a
(6) Appeals challenging the service or enforcement of a financial administrative penalty or a 
fine are governed by the German rules on service and enforcement. Appeals against the 
decision underlying the service or enforceme nt requested are governed by the legislation of 
the requesting Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area.  
Section 30  
Refusal of incoming requests  
(1) The requested enforcement authority or the central authority may refuse an incoming  
request where  
1. the request does not contain the information required for outgoing requests in 
accordance with section 27 or  
2. the request manifestly does not correspond to the underlying decision.  
(2) The requested enforcement authority or the central authority may refuse an incoming 
request for enforcement in addition where  
1. the envisaged costs or resources required for the enforcement are 
disproportionate in relation to the amount of the administrative penalty or fine to be 
enforced,  
2. the administ rative penalty or the fine to be enforced or its equivalent in euro s 
amounts to less than 350 euros or  
3. the enforcement would not be compatible with the fundamental rights of the 
person or persons concerned or with other constitutional legal principles f or the protection 
of the person or persons concerned.  
(3) The enforcement authority notifies the refusal of an incoming request including the 
reasoning thereof to the central authority without delay. The central authority informs the
requesting authority w ithout delay. Before refusing an incoming request in accordance with 
subsection (1) no. 1 or 2, the central authority gives the requesting authority a period of one 
month within which it may transmit the missing information or complete the request.  
Divisio n 8 
Labour and social law advisory services  
Section  31 
Entitlement  
(1) The German Trade Union Federation (DGB) is entitled to up to 3.996 million  euros per 
calendar year in federal funding to establish and operate centres to provide advice on labour 
and so cial law matters as well as to develop and deliver training courses and information 
material linked to those advisory services.  
(2) This entitlement only exists if the advisory services  
1. are geared towards EU citizens who are employed, are to be employed  or were 
employed in Germany within the framework of the freedom of movement for workers or 
as workers posted across borders,  
2. are free of charge to those receiving advice, and  
3. do not require those receiving advice to be a member of a trade union.  
(3) The advisory centres referred to in subsection  (1) provide employees from third countries 
with information about suitable and available services provided by other competent advisory 
centres and refer such third -country nationals to those advisory centres.  Posted third -country 
nationals may be involved in the provision of advisory services if there is a direct factual link 
to a case already handled by one of the advisory services as referred to in subsections  (1) 
and (2). A direct factual link in particular  exists where third -country nationals and EU citizens 
are posted by the same employer.  
(4) Entitlement to the full amount only exists if the German Trade Union Federation also 
contributes own funding towards financing the advisory centres in the amount of one ninth of 
the amount of the approved funding. The beneficiary identifies the amount of the own 
funding in its application and uses it directly to fund the advisory centres. If the own 
contribution is not paid in full, previously approved funding is redu ced to the ninefold amount 
of the own contribution paid.  
(5) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs is the authority competent for granting
of the own contribution paid.  
(5) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs is the authority competent for granting 
the funding. It takes a decision on the beneficiary’s application by way of an administrative 
act. 
(6) Fo r the purposes of a numerical check, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
each year conducts at least two sample audits and one detailed audit relating to the use of 
the funding. For the purposes of a factual check, the German Trade Union Fede ration no 
later than three months after the end of the funding period submits a report on measures and 
activities carried out in the  funding  period.  
(7) Upon request and after the prior consent of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social 
Affairs, the fund ing received may be passed on to third parties on the basis of a contract 
under private law. The beneficiary remains responsible and accountable for the appropriate 
use of the funding.  
(8) The entitlement arises for the first time in respect of the calenda r year 2021.  
(9) The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs will, by 31 December 2025, conduct an 
evaluation of the range of advisory services and information provided.  
Section  32 
Authorisation to issue statutory instrument  
The Federal Ministry of L abour and Social Affairs determines, by way of a statutory 
instrument not requiring the approval of the Bundesrat,
1. further details concerning the granting of the funding,  
2. the application procedure,  
3. the conditions and procedure for passing the fund ing made available on to third 
parties,  
4. further details concerning checks regarding the use of funds.  
Section 33 
Duty to provide information in cases of recruitment from abroad  
Employers established in Germany that conclude a contract of employment with  a Union 
citizen in accordance with section 31 (2) no. 1  with residence or habitual abode abroad for 
the purpose of performing work in Germany are to inform that person in writing no later than 
on the first day of performing work of the possibility of maki ng use  of the services of the 
advisory centres in accordance with section 31 and are to provide the current contact details 
of the advisory centre. If the worker  has been placed with the employer and the placement 
agent has a duty to provide information to  the worker  in accordance with section 299 of the 
Third Book of the Social Code, the obligation to provide information does not apply.  
Division  9 
Special rules and  transitional provisions  
Subdivision 1  
Special rules for certain activities  performed by work ers employed by employers 
established abroad  
Section 34  
Initial assembly and installation work  
The working conditions as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 and no.  2, section  5 sentence  1 
no. 1 to no.  3 and section  13b of this Act and as referred to in sec tion 20 of the Minimum 
Wage Act ( Mindestlohngesetz ) do not apply to workers employed in Germany by employers 
established abroad if  
1. those workers perform initial assembly or installation work which  
a) forms part of a supply contract,  
b) is essential in o rder to be able to bring  the delivered items into service , and  
c) is carried out by the supplier company’s skilled or semi -skilled workers, and  
2. the period of employment in Germany does not exceed eight day s within the 
space of one year.  
Sentence  1 does not apply to building services within the meaning of section  101 (2) of Book
Sentence  1 does not apply to building services within the meaning of section  101 (2) of Book 
Three of the Social Code.  
Section 35  
Specific activities without a recipient of services in Germany  
The working conditions as referred to in section  2 (1) no.  1 and no.  2, section  5 sentence  1 
no. 1 to no.  4 and section  13b of this Act and as referred to in section  20 of the Minimum 
Wage Act do not apply to workers and temporary agency workers who are temporarily 
employed in Germany by employers or user enterprises established abro ad and who, whilst 
not performing work or providing services to third parties in Germany on behalf of their 
employer,  
1. hold meetings or conduct negotiations in Germany, draw up contractual offers 
or conclude contracts on behalf of their employer,
2. attend as a visitor a trade fair, specialist conference or symposium without 
performing any of the activities  referred to in section  2a (1) no.  8 of the Act to Combat 
Undeclared Work and Unlawful Employment,  
3. establish a business unit in Germany on behalf of  their employer, or  
4. are employed as a professional  by an international group or company for the 
purpose of providing in -house training in a group or business unit in Germany.  
Work is regarded as ʻtemporaryʼ if the worker is not active in Germany for more than 14 
consecutive  days and for no more than 30 days within the space of 12 months.  
Subdivision 2  
Special rules for the road transport sector  
Section 36  
Drivers employed in Ge rmany by employers established abroad  
(1) The working conditions as referred to in sections 2, 5 and 13b of this Act and as referred 
to in section 20 of the Minimum Wage Act apply to those drivers who are employed by 
employers established abroad to provide  transport services for goods or passengers in 
Germany in the framework of a posting as referred to in Article 1  (3) (a) of Directive 
96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1996 concerning 
the posting of workers in the framew ork of the provision of services (OJ L 18, 21.1.1997, p.  
1), as last amended by Directive (EU) 2018/957 (OJ L 173, 9.7.2018, p. 16; OJ L 91, 
29.3.2019, p. 77). Drivers are considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of 
sentence 1 in particular where they  
1. on the basis of a transport contract perform national transport operations in 
relation to goods or passengers in accordance with Regulation (EC) No  1072/2009 or 
Regulation (EC) No  1073/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 
October 2009 on common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus
October 2009 on common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus 
services, and amending Regulation (EC) No 561/2006  (OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 88),  as 
last amended by  Regulation (EU) No 517/2013 (OJ L 158 , 10.6.2013, p. 1),  (cabotage) o r 
2. on the basis of a transport contract perform a transport operation in relation to 
goods or to passengers from a State other than the employer’s State of establishment 
across a border to a State other than the employer’ s State of establishment (trilate ral 
operations) and either the departure point or destination is located in Germany.  
(2) Sections 37 to 40 do not apply where the employer is established in a third country. 
Employers established in a State which has entered into an international agreement  with 
effect for the Federal Republic of Germany providing for the application of posting rules to 
the road transport sector are treated in accordance with those rules provided for in the 
international agreement.  
Section 37  
Bilateral transport operations i n relation to goods  
(1) Drivers are not considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  
(1) where they exclusively perform bilateral transport operations in relation to goods.  
(2) A bilateral transport operation in relation to goods i s the transport of goods on the basis 
of a transport contract  
1. from the Member State where the employer is established  to another Member 
State of the European Union or the European Economic Area or to a third country or  
2. from another Member State of th e European Union or the European Economic 
Area or from a  third country to the Member State where the employer is established . 
(3) Drivers are not considered to be employed in Germany, in derogation from section 36  (1) 
sentence 2 no. 2, when performing the first trilateral transport operation in relation to goods
within the framework of a bilateral transport operation as referred to in subsection (2). In 
derogation from sentence 1, drivers are also not considered to be employed in Germany 
when performing the  second trilateral transport operation in relation to goods within the 
framework of a bilateral transport operation where this bilateral transport operation  
1. is an operation which ends  in the Member State of establishment and  
2. follows, without the perf ormance of any transport operations  in the intervening 
period,  a bilateral transport operation which started in the Member State of establishment 
and during which no trilateral transport operation was performed.  
(4) From the date on which smart tachographs  are required to be fitted in the vehicles 
registered in a Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area for the 
first time, as provided for in the fourth subparagraph of Article 8  (1) of Regulation (EU) No 
165/2014, the exemptions set o ut in subsection (3) apply solely to drivers using motor 
vehicles fitted with smart tachographs as provided for in Articles 8 to 10 of Regulation (EU) 
No 165/2014.  
Section 38  
Bilateral transport operations in relation to passengers  
(1) Drivers a re not considered to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  
(1) where they perform exclusively bilateral transport operations in relation to passengers.  
(2) A bilateral transport operation in relation to passengers is a transport operation  in which 
the driver  
1. picks up passengers in the Member  State where the employer is e stablish ed 
and sets them down in another Member State of the European Union or the European 
Economic Area or a third country,  
2. picks up passengers in a nother  Member St ate of the European Union or the 
European Economic Area or a third country and sets them down in the Member State 
where the employer is established  or 
3. picks up and sets down passengers in the Member State where the employer is 
established for the purpos e of carrying out local excursions in another Member State of 
the European Union or the European Economic Area or a third country.
the European Union or the European Economic Area or a third country.  
(3) In derogation from section 36  (1) sentence 2 no. 2, drivers are not considered to be 
employed in Germany when  
1. performi ng the first trilateral transport operation in the framework of a bilateral 
transport operation as referred to in subsection (2) and  
2. they do not offer passenger transport services between two locations within the 
Member State crossed.  
(4) From the date on which smart tachographs are required to be fitted in the vehicles 
registered in a Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area for the 
first time, as provided for in the fourth subparagraph of Article 8  (1) of Regulation (EU) No 
165/2014, the exemptions set out in subsection (3) apply solely to drivers using motor 
vehicles fitted with smart tachographs as provided for in Articles 8 to 10 of Regulation (EU) 
No 165/2014.  
Section 39  
Combined transport operations  
Drivers are not considere d to be employed in Germany within the meaning of section 36  (1) 
when performing the initial or final road leg of a combined transport operation as defined in 
Council Directive 92/106/EEC of 7 December 1992 on the establishment of common rules 
for certain types of combined transport of goods between Member States (OJ L 368, 
17.12.1992, p. 38), as last amended by Directive 2013/22/EU (OJ L 158, 10.6.2013, p. 356),
if on the road leg exclusively bilateral transport operations and additional transport 
operatio ns in relation to goods as referred to in section 37 are performed.  
Section 40  
Transit  
Drivers employed by an employer established in another Member State of the European 
Union or the European Economic Area are not considered to be employed in Germany with in 
the meaning of section 36  (1) where they transit through Germany without loading or 
unloading freight and without picking up or setting down passengers (transit).  
Subdivision 3  
Transitional provisions  
Section  41 
Transitional provisions concerning long -term posting  
(1) The working conditions provided for under section  13b (1) apply as of 30  July 2020 at the 
earliest.  
(2) Periods of employment in Germany before 30  July 2020 are included when calculating 
the period of employment in accordance with section  13b (1). If the employment in Germany 
began before 30  July 2020, notification as referred to in  section  13b (2) is deemed to have 
been made.  
Section  42 
Transitional provisions concerning  the building industry  
Any declaration of general applicability of a co llective agreement in the building industry  in 
accordance with section  4 (1) no.  1 and section  6 (2) which was made before 30  July 2020 is 
equal, as regards the application of sections  8 and 9 and Division  5, to a statutory instrument 
as referred to in sec tion 7 insofar as that collective agreement lays down working conditions 
as referred to  in section  5 sentence  1 no.  1.
